{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f34\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f35\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f37\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f38\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f39\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f40\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f41\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f42\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f43\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f45\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f46\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f47\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}
{\f48\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f49\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f50\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f51\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f53\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}
{\f54\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f55\fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}{\f56\fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}{\f57\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;
\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 
\additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid896411776\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'043:\'b6\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'04;}
\b\i0\f1\fs20\cf6\chbrdr\brdrnone\brdrcf1 \chshdng0\chcfpat1\chcbpat1\fbias0 \jclisttab\tx720 }{\listname ;}\listid178086263}{\list\listtemplateid-1429330256\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1
\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'040:\'b6\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'04;}\b\i0\f1\fs20\cf6\chbrdr\brdrnone\brdrcf1 \chshdng0\chcfpat1\chcbpat1\fbias0 \jclisttab\tx720 }{\listname ;}\listid1015695158}{\list\listtemplateid1860865758\listsimple{\listlevel
\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'041:\'b6\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'04;}\b\i0\f1\fs20\cf6\chbrdr\brdrnone\brdrcf1 \chshdng0\chcfpat1\chcbpat1\fbias0 \jclisttab\tx720 }{\listname 
;}\listid1040713001}{\list\listtemplateid-337071620\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'045:\'b6\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'04;}\b\i0\f1\fs20\cf6\chbrdr\brdrnone\brdrcf1 
\chshdng0\chcfpat1\chcbpat1\fbias0 \jclisttab\tx720 }{\listname ;}\listid1481193235}{\list\listtemplateid-1340062134\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext
\'044:\'b6\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'04;}\b\i0\f1\fs20\cf6\chbrdr\brdrnone\brdrcf1 \chshdng0\chcfpat1\chcbpat1\fbias0 \jclisttab\tx720 }{\listname ;}\listid1800103188}{\list\listtemplateid1697968682\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0
\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'042:\'b6\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'04;}\b\i0\f1\fs20\cf6\chbrdr\brdrnone\brdrcf1 \chshdng0\chcfpat1\chcbpat1\fbias0 \jclisttab\tx720 }{\listname ;}\listid1861704490}}{\*\listoverridetable
{\listoverride\listid1015695158\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid1040713001\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid1861704490\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid178086263\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid1800103188
\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid1481193235\listoverridecount0\ls6}}{\info{\title DIAMOND DUST}{\author Dr. K. Kay Shearin}{\operator Joseph E. Loewenstein}{\creatim\yr2003\mo5\dy15\hr16\min24}{\revtim\yr2003\mo5\dy19\hr18\min12}{\version5}
{\edmins11}{\nofpages72}{\nofwords22931}{\nofchars-32766}{\*\company POACh}{\nofcharsws0}{\vern8247}}\margl1210\margr2880\margt720 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace120
\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2
\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\f2\fs19 The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diamond Dust, by K. Kay Shearin
\par 
\par ** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
\par **     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **
\par 
\par Performance copyright (C) 1992 K. Kay Shearin based
\par on the Project Gutenberg Public Domain edition of
\par Diamond Dust, by K. Kay Shearin
\par 
\par This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
\par Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
\par header without written permission.
\par 
\par Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
\par eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
\par important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
\par how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
\par donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.
\par 
\par 
\par **Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**
\par 
\par **eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**
\par 
\par *****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****
\par 
\par 
\par Title: Diamond Dust
\par 
\par Author: K. Kay Shearin
\par 
\par Release Date: March, 2005  [EBook #7773]
\par [Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
\par [This file was first posted on May 16, 2003]
\par 
\par Edition: 10
\par 
\par Language: English
\par 
\par Character set encoding: ISO-Latin-1
\par 
\par 
\par This file should be titled didst10r.rtf or didst10r.zip
\par 
\par We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
\par of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
\par Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
\par even years after the official publication date.
\par 
\par Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
\par midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
\par The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
\par Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
\par preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
\par and editing by those who wish to do so.
\par 
\par Most people start at our sites at:
\par http://gutenberg.net or
\par http://promo.net/pg
\par 
\par These Web sites include award\_winning information about Project
\par Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
\par eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).
\par 
\par Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
\par can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
\par also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
\par indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
\par announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.
\par 
\par http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext05 or
\par ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext05
\par 
\par Or /etext04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92,
\par 92, 91 or 90
\par 
\par Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
\par as it appears in our Newsletters.
\par 
\par 
\par Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)
\par 
\par We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
\par time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
\par to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
\par searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
\par projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
\par per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
\par million dollars per hour in 2001 as we release over 50 new eBook
\par files per month, or 500 more eBooks in 2000 for a total of 4000+
\par If they reach just 1\_2% of the world's population then the total
\par should reach over 300 billion eBooks given away by year's end.
\par 
\par The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion eBook
\par Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
\par This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
\par which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.
\par 
\par At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one\_third
\par of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 4,000 eBooks.  We need
\par funding, as well as continued efforts by volunteers, to maintain
\par or increase our production and reach our goals.
\par 
\par The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
\par to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.
\par 
\par As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
\par and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
\par Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
\par Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
\par Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
\par Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
\par Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
\par Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
\par Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.
\par 
\par We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
\par that have responded.
\par 
\par As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
\par will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
\par Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.
\par 
\par In answer to various questions we have received on this:
\par 
\par We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
\par request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
\par you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
\par just ask.
\par 
\par While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
\par not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
\par donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
\par donate.
\par 
\par International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
\par how to make them tax\_deductible, or even if they CAN be made
\par deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
\par ways.
\par 
\par Donations by check or money order may be sent to:
\par 
\par Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
\par PMB 113
\par 1739 University Ave.
\par Oxford, MS 38655\_4109
\par 
\par Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
\par method other than by check or money order.
\par 
\par The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
\par the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
\par [Employee Identification Number] 64\_622154.  Donations are
\par tax\_deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund\_raising
\par requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
\par made and fund\_raising will begin in the additional states.
\par 
\par We need your donations more than ever!
\par 
\par You can get up to date donation information online at:
\par 
\par http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html
\par 
\par ***
\par 
\par If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
\par you can always email directly to:
\par 
\par Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
\par 
\par Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.
\par 
\par We would prefer to send you information by email.
\par 
\par 
\par **Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
\par (Three Pages)
\par 
\par ***START** SMALL PRINT! for COPYRIGHT PROTECTED EBOOKS ***
\par 
\par TITLE AND COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
\par 
\par Performance copyright (C) 1992 K. Kay Shearin based
\par on the Project Gutenberg Public Domain edition of
\par Diamond Dust, by K. Kay Shearin
\par 
\par This eBook is distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart through the
\par Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project") under the "Project
\par Gutenberg" trademark and with the permission of the eBook's
\par copyright owner.
\par 
\par Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
\par any commercial products without permission.
\par 
\par 
\par LICENSE
\par You can (and are encouraged!) to copy and distribute this
\par Project Gutenberg\_tm eBook.  Since, unlike many other of the
\par Project's eBooks, it is copyright protected, and since the
\par materials and methods you use will effect the Project's reputation,
\par your right to copy and distribute it is limited by the copyright
\par laws and by the conditions of this "Small Print!" statement.
\par 
\par   [A]  ALL COPIES: You may distribute copies of this eBook
\par electronically or on any machine readable medium now known
\par or hereafter discovered so long as you:
\par 
\par      (1)  Honor the refund and replacement provisions of this
\par "Small Print!" statement; and
\par 
\par      (2)  Pay a royalty to the Foundation of 20% of the gross
\par profits you derive calculated using the method you already use
\par to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you don't derive
\par profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are payable to "Project
\par Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation" within the 60 days
\par following each date you prepare (or were legally required
\par to prepare) your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.
\par 
\par   [B]  EXACT AND MODIFIED COPIES: The copies you distribute
\par must either be exact copies of this eBook, including this
\par Small Print statement, or can be in binary, compressed, mark\_
\par up, or proprietary form (including any form resulting from
\par word processing or hypertext software), so long as *EITHER*:
\par 
\par      (1)  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
\par does *not* contain characters other than those intended by the
\par author of the work, although tilde (~), asterisk (*) and
\par underline (_) characters may be used to convey punctuation
\par intended by the author, and additional characters may be used
\par to indicate hypertext links; OR
\par 
\par      (2)  The eBook is readily convertible by the reader at no
\par expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form by the
\par program that displays the eBook (as is the case, for instance,
\par with most word processors); OR
\par 
\par      (3)  You provide or agree to provide on request at no
\par additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the eBook in plain
\par ASCII.
\par 
\par LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
\par This eBook may contain a "Defect" in the form of incomplete,
\par inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
\par or other infringement, a defective or damaged disk, computer
\par virus, or codes that damage or cannot be read by your
\par equipment.  But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund"
\par described below, the Project (and any other party you may
\par receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG\_tm eBook)
\par disclaims all liability to you for damages, costs and
\par expenses, including legal fees, and YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR
\par NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF
\par WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT,
\par CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU
\par GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
\par 
\par If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
\par receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
\par you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
\par time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
\par on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
\par such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
\par copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
\par choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
\par receive it electronically.
\par 
\par THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS\_IS".  NO OTHER
\par WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
\par TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
\par LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
\par PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of
\par implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of
\par consequential damages, so the above disclaimers and exclusions
\par may not apply to you, and you may have other legal rights.
\par 
\par INDEMNITY
\par You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart and the Foundation,
\par and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
\par with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg\_tm
\par texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
\par legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
\par following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
\par [2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
\par or [3] any Defect.
\par 
\par WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
\par Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
\par public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
\par in machine readable form.
\par 
\par The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
\par public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
\par Money should be paid to the:
\par "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
\par 
\par If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
\par software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
\par hart@pobox.com
\par 
\par 
\par *SMALL PRINT! Ver.03.17.02 FOR COPYRIGHT PROTECTED EBOOKS*END*
\par 
\par      *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *    *     *
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri14\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\b\f1\fs24\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri14\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\b\f1\fs24\cgrid0 
\par 
\par 
\par DIAMOND DUST
\par }{\f1\cgrid0 
\par 
\par by
\par 
\par K. Kay Shearin
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f1\fs28\cgrid0 \'a9}{\f1\cgrid0       K. Kay Shearin      1992
\par Contact:  ks24@georgetown.edu
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f1\cgrid0 FOREWORD
\par }{\f1\cgrid0 
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 0:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 1\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 0:\'b6}}\faauto\ls1\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I didn't do very much research for this book -\~- mostly I looked up spellings or dates in a dictionary or my 1972 }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Funk & Wagnall's New Encyclopedia}{\f1\cgrid0 
, but I also reviewed documents I wrote or received that described events at the time -\~- because it's an account of what I've seen and experienced myself. 
 Where I've repeated something someone else told me, I've tried to identify that source and the circumstantial evidence that makes me believe it, and I haven't included anything that I don't affirmatively think is true.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 0:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 2\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 0:\'b6}}\faauto\ls1\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Many of the things I've said
 here are unflattering to someone, but nothing here is actionable defamation, partly because what I've said is true and partly because it's already been published in transcripts of in-court testimony that are public records.  Nobody put me up to writing t
his, and I can't imagine very many people could be happy that I have, but I wanted the catharsis of packaging these memories into a bundle so I can walk away from it and get on with my life.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 0:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 3\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 0:\'b6}}\faauto\ls1\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Nearly thirty years ago a mentor said to me, "There are tw
o kinds of people in the world: those who get ulcers and those who give them to others., Which do you want to be?"  It took me some years to master the technique, but now I usually manage to get aggravations out of my system instead of brooding on them.  
Oysters can turn their irritants into pearls, and I'd like to salvage some pearls of wisdom from mine.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 0:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 4\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 0:\'b6}}\faauto\ls1\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Many of my attitudes were shaped by my mother's sister.  My mother's abuse made any healthy relationship between us impossible, so for about ten y
ears from my parents' divorce when I was thirteen, Aunt Ruth was in many ways my real parent.  She was amoral and apolitical and a lot like "Auntie Mame," and she taught me to evaluate things for myself and to measure them against my own standards and exp
erience.  If she were still alive, she'd be proud of me for writing a book, but she wouldn't understand that it's payment of a moral debt.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 0:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 5\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 0:\'b6}}\faauto\ls1\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 My late Aunt Frances would, though.  My father's mother died when I was an infant, so her youngest sister fill
ed the place of a grandmother for me.  She was famous within the family for putting the words on people, and her words were often unsuitable for polite society.  From her I learned to call a spade a blankety blankety spade and to stand up to anyone who ha
d
 done me or mine wrong.  One of my warmest memories is of the time I blessed Aunt Frances out for an insensitive remark she had made about my father in front of him, and she admitted she had been out of line.  That was the rite of passage that marked my a
rrival into adulthood.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 0:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 6\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 0:\'b6}}\faauto\ls1\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
I believe most problems between people result from a failure to communicate.  On the theory that "If you're not part of the solution, you're part of the problem," this book is my effort to communicate.
\par }\pard \qr \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 K. Kay Shearin
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri14\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Elsmere, Delaware
\par June 1992
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri14\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par 
\par }{\b\f1\cgrid0 CONTENTS
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri14\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \ql \li1440\ri14\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin1440\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 CHAPTER I.\tab The lay of the land
\par 
\par CHAPTER II.\tab The best politicians money can buy
\par 
\par CHAPTER III.\tab When the chits hit the fan
\par 
\par CHAPTER IV.\tab A crock of malarkey
\par 
\par CHAPTER V.\tab Tilting at windmills for fun and profit
\par 
\par INDEX OF TOPICS IN TEXT
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri14\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par 
\par \sect }\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain \qc \li0\ri14\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\b\f1\cgrid0 CHAPTER  I.  The lay of the land
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 1\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Delaware is the opposite of the old clich\'e9: not much to visit, but a great place to live.  To Amtrak passengers in the northeast corridor, it's a station between Baltimore and
 Philadelphia; to drivers on Interstate 95, it's not even a wide place in the road between Washington and New York; to its residents, it's one of the best-kept secrets around -\~- a pearl not to be cast before swinish outsiders.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 2\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 As nearly as anyone 
knows, the state's population is somewhere around 700,000.  Although it's the second smallest state in area and has only three counties, there is a marked polarity between the relatively urbanized northern tip of the state, where most of the population is
 concentrated in Wilmington, and what they often call "slower Delaware," usually defined as "below the [Chesapeake & Delaware] canal."
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 3\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Someone seeking a symbol of Wilmington to put on souvenirs -\~- in case anyone would ever want a souvenir of Wilmington -\~
- would probably pick the equestrian statue of Declaration of Independence signer Caesar Rodney that usually stands in Rodney Square, a grassy one-block plaza in the middle of town.  He was the hero who had gone home to die but returned to Independe
nce Hall to cast the tie-breaking vote in the Delaware delegation in favor of the Declaration; we're still arguing about whether he died of cancer or syphilis.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 4\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 They took his statue down a year or so ago to fix it, and its massive plinth looks like a ruin standing across the street from the Hotel du\~
Pont that takes up most of the block on the west of the Square.  The block east of the Square is occupied by the Public Building housing the state trial courts for the county.  Facing the Square on its so
uth is the public library, and on its north is the headquarters of Wilmington Trust Company, the favorite bank of the duPont family and E.\~I. du\~
Pont de Nemours & Company, Inc.  Standing in Rodney Square, you're physically less than five miles from New Jersey, ten from Pennsylvania, and fifteen from Maryland, but in most ways you're in a different world.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 5\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Until about two decades ago the duPonts ran Delaware as a company town, and they ran a tight ship.  For example, once upon a time du\~Pont wanted to
 hire a high-level executive; a candidate and his family passed muster, and he was offered the position.  He said the only problem with moving to Delaware was that his daughter was taking ice skating lessons and hoped someday to qualify for the Olympics, 
and there was no teacher of that caliber in Delaware.  Today there are, at the two Olympic-sized rinks down the road from Wilmington in Newark; one is where Calla Urbanski and Rocky Marvel trained for the 1992 Winter Olympics.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 6\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I heard that story in 
1974 from the people who interviewed me for a job on the professional staff of the University of Delaware, whose main campus is in Newark.  Their theme was that Delaware was, and would remain, the kind of place where I would want to be, because du\~
Pont would always exert its influence to insure that Delaware was the kind of place the kind of people it wanted to attract would want to live.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 7\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 They also explained to me that U. of D. was a private, not a public, school because if it were public it would b
e subject to the federal anti-segregation laws, and nobody wanted that.  So in an arrangement that may be unique, and which is often called "semi-private," instead of making the school the state university and having the legislature appropriate money from
 the general treasury for it, each year the General Assembly votes for a voluntary donation to the private school, on behalf of the taxpayers of Delaware, out of the treasury.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 8\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Partly because of its small size, and partly because of du\~Pont's histori
c paternalism, Delaware in general, and Wilmington in particular, don't suffer today from the problems that plague so many parts of our country, especially the major cities.  And the problems Delaware does have are largely the result of du\~
Pont's abdication of that r\'f4le, leaving the kind of power vacuum that inevitably attracts scoundrels to public office.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 9\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Delaware's economy is, of course, the product of that political situation.  Du\~Pont is by far the greatest economic power in the state, but Hercu
les Incorporated and ICI Americas Inc. are players, too, especially in Wilmington.  Downstate is agricultural, except for the summer shore resorts, just north of the border with Maryland, at the other end of the ferry from Cape May, New Jersey.  Peaches a
n
d other fruit were a big cash crop early in this century, but a blight killed most of the orchards, some of which are still standing, eerily beautiful, like rows of surreal black skeletons.  Today much of the country's scrapple is made in Delaware, but th
e main agribusiness is the "chicken factories" where poultry is processed and packaged for supermarkets -\~- some people will tell you lower Delaware is God's country, but many will tell you it's Frank Purdue's.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 10\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Although there is a big Air Force base in Dover, the federal government is a relatively minor economic force, so federal pork barrels don't influence Delaware politics much.  State and local governments don't employ a lot of people, and many government em
p
loyees, even some of the highest elected officials, are allowed to have private employment at the same time, so political pigs have access to slop from other sources, not just the public trough.  The office of Attorney General, for example, is established
 
in the state constitution; the AG heads the Department of Justice, is elected in a statewide election every four years, and stands third in line to become governor if something happens to the governor, the lieutenant governor, and the secretary of state. 
 
The AG can invalidate state statutes simply by issuing a written opinion, and no criminal complaint can even be filed, much less prosecuted, without the AG's approval; in short, as Delaware's lawyer, the AG has complete control over all legal processes th
at involve the state government.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 11\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Incumbent AG Charles M. Oberly III, first elected in 1982, shortly started publishing a newsletter as a private business.  Questions were raised as to whether that was ethical or even lawful, but Oberly exercised hi
s power to rule it was okay.  That's what they mean by, "There's no excuse for losing if you're keeping score."  Today that newsletter, which reports the rulings in some cases in Delaware courts, is written by Deputy AGs and typed by secretaries in the De
p
t. of Justice, both in the course of their public employment.  But the subscription money goes to Oberly personally, and although the quality of the newsletter is poor, compared to competing publications, the subscription price is lower, too, because Ober
ly doesn't have the same production costs as his competitors, and some of his subscribers have told me they see it as legal insurance -\~
- they've noticed the Dept. of Justice is more attentive to the needs of subscribers, and they more often enjoy favorable results in legal proceedings, than nonsubscribers.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 12\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Oberly has rejected offers to purchase his newsletter business for more than it's worth, because he wants to keep that ostensibly legitimate mechanism for collecting money from the citi
zens he's pledged to serve.  You get what you pay for.  That story was told to me by several persons, including some of the competing publishers, who had offered to buy Oberly out, while I was working for them, but many other elected officers have lucrati
ve private sidelines.  The county Recorder of Deeds and Register of Wills, for example, both have private law practices besides those elective, salaried positions that provide them offices and staffs in the public buildings in Wilmington.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 13\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 So does t
he Public Defender, who is appointed, not elected.  Lawrence M. Sullivan has been Delaware's PD for more than twenty years, and most indigent criminal defendants in state court are represented by one of his deputy PDs, who also have private law practices 
on the side.  The poor quality of these representations have been an open scandal for years:  In 1981, in an opinion in }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Waters v. State}{\f1\cgrid0 , published at 440 }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Atlantic Reporter 2d}{\f1\cgrid0 
 321, the Delaware Supreme Court took Sullivan to task for trying to shirk responsi
bility for the inadequacy of the legal services he provided.  It has been traditional for the PDs to divert defendants who can come up with any money, usually from their families, to their private practices; a very few indigent defendants, usually repeat 
offenders who learned the first time around how much help the PD is, demand and get independent lawyers appointed and paid by the court.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 14\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The defendants stuck with the PD are often worse off than if they had no lawyer at all, because they rely on th
e bum advice they get from a lawyer who gets paid the same salary no matter how much or little time he spends on their case and resents taking the time away from his private practice, where he can bill by the hour.  Take the case of Susan J. Scott, for ex
a
mple:  On 20 September 1986 she fatally shot her live-in boyfriend who had been violently assaulting her for the five years they had been together.  She was arrested, charged in Delaware Superior Court with first-degree murder and possession of a deadly w
eapon during the commission of a felony.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 15\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
She was represented by one PD for about a year, and then he left the PD's office, so her case was assigned to another deputy PD named Duane D. Werb.  Although he knew there was evidence supporting Scott's se
lf-defense claim, Werb advised her that the "battered woman defense" wouldn't fly in Delaware, that there wasn't enough evidence to prove self defense at trial, that proving self defense couldn't clear her of the lesser included offense of manslaughter, a
n
d that if she pled guilty to manslaughter she would receive a sentence of three and a half to seven years in prison.  So on 26 May 1988, a week before her trial was supposed to start, Scott took Werb's advice and pled guilty to manslaughter; she was sente
nced to twenty-five years in prison.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 16\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Then Scott's family managed to scrape up the money to hire New Orleans lawyer Richard Ducote, with a national reputation for representing battered women, to try to get her sentence reduced.  On 19 July 1989 Judg
e John E. Babiarz Jr., who had accepted Scott's guilty plea and sentenced her, reversed her conviction in a written opinion ruling that Werb had committed legal malpractice by giving her advice that was blatantly wrong on three separate points of law.  Th
e
 two charges against her were reinstated, and Scott's trial was scheduled for 16 October.  That morning the deputy AG offered another plea agreement:  If she would plead guilty to manslaughter, she would be sentenced to three years, which was how long she
'd been in maximum security by then.  So she pled guilty and was immediately released from prison.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 17\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Scott wanted to sue the PD for legal malpractice, and Ducote was willing to represent her in that suit, but he had trouble finding a member of the De
laware bar willing to go up against the PD, and he had to have a Delaware lawyer to act as local counsel because he wasn't licensed to practice law here.  He finally asked the Delaware ACLU for help, but all they did was give him my name; I agreed to be l
ocal counsel in the case, and that's why I came to know about it.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 18\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 On 15 August 1991 we filed Scott's civil complaint in Superior Court, against Sullivan and Werb.  Remember that the prosecutor in the criminal case had been the AG and that a Superio
r Court judge had already ruled the PD committed legal malpractice.  Now the AG appeared on behalf of the PD, because the AG is the lawyer who represents all state employees, and Superior Court Judge Vincent J. Poppiti summarily dismissed the complaint:  
He ruled that because Scott had pled guilty to manslaughter, the same as she did on Werb's advice, she could not have been harmed by any wrong advice he gave her!  That dismissal was recently affirmed by the Delaware Supreme Court.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 19\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 That story illus
trates not only the incestuous (if not downright masturbatory) nature of Delaware's criminal justice system but also the distinctive feature of Delaware civil litigation:  Most participants in civil litigation are from out of state, and they have to pay f
eatherbedding Delaware lawyers to hold the courthouse doors open for them.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 20\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 A couple of years ago the American Bar Association rated Delaware as fourth in the country in the number of lawyers }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 per}{\f1\cgrid0  }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 capita}{\f1\cgrid0 
, and that's true as far as the numbers go, but
 it gives a false impression:  Many of the lawyers in Delaware are employed in companies other than law firms, so they're not available for hire by other clients; many of the lawyers working in banks or other companies are not admitted to the Delaware bar
,
 so they couldn't go into private practice anyhow.  Unlike many states, Delaware no longer cuts lawyers from other states any slack in getting into the Delaware bar, and every candidate for admission has to take the same bar exam and perform the same cler
k
ship, no matter how long the person may have been a lawyer (or even a judge) elsewhere.  This anti-carpetbagger rule was made by the all-lawyer state Supreme Court, not the nearly lawyer-free legislature (now 1 of 21 senators; 1 of 41 representatives), an
d ensures that there won't be too many lawyers (about 1900 now) compared to the amount of business, but it has the effect of decreasing competition, and I firmly believe that free-market competition is always good and is what made this country great.

\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 21\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In many places, the lawyers who make the most money are the ones who do personal injury litigation -\~
- that's why you see so many commercials for that kind of business wherever lawyers are allowed to advertise on television.  PI lawyers usually work for
 a contingency fee (often a third of the amount recovered), meaning they get paid only if they win, and the plaintiff doesn't pay any up-front legal fees.  That's why there's too much litigation in this country:  No matter how bogus the suits are, a lawye
r
 who files enough of them will sometimes hit the jackpot; defendants often settle for nuisance value to avoid the humongous legal expenses they will incur even if they end up winning, and it doesn't cost plaintiffs anything to sue, so if they lose they're
 not out anything, and if they win they come out ahead.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 22\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
In Delaware it's not like that.  The big-ticket legal cases here are not over personal injuries but over corporation law, and we have a special court for litigating corporation cases, the Chan
cery Court.  Chancery or equity court started in England in the late 1300s and over the centuries developed a separate structure similar to that of the so-called law courts, and certain types of cases became associated with one or the other.  By the time 
A
merica was settled, it was established that criminal prosecutions and civil suits for money damages were legal cases, while probate, adoptions, and civil suits for injunctions were equity cases.  One of the main distinctions between them was that there we
re no juries in chancery.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 23\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
A trustee is a person who has agreed to hold or manage property for someone else's benefit, and anything to do with trusts is within the equity court's jurisdiction.  The idea of a corporation is that its directors are tru
stees for its stockholders, managing the money they paid for their shares for their benefit, so any litigation over corporate affairs is a chancery case.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 24\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The federal District Courts have both legal and equitable jurisdiction, but only in cases whe
re there is federal jurisdiction over the subject matter, of course, and most states have similarly combined the two courts into one, although some states maintain a distinction between the law division and equity division of the court.  In Delaware the S
uperior Court has jurisdiction over cases that are legal only and the Chancery Court has jurisdiction over every case where either the subject matter or the relief sought includes any equitable component.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 25\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 So in Delaware if you want to sue your neig
hbor for the cost of fixing your garage when he overshot his driveway and smashed into it, you do that in Superior Court; if you want to enjoin him from driving across your property in the future, you do that in Chancery; and if you want to do both in one
 suit, you have to do that in Chancery, too, because the Chancery Court has jurisdiction over legal claims related to equitable claims, but the Superior Court doesn't have jurisdiction over equitable claims related to legal ones.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 26\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The Chancery Court
 now has five judges: Chancellor William T. Allen, who is rated one of the best chancellors in living memory, and four vice chancellors of varying lesser ability.  Most of the cases that come to them involve either trusts or corporations, and there are no
 
juries, so they make all the decisions in every case, and that gives them an awful lot of experience.  Unfortunately it's like what John F. Kennedy said about the difference between ten years of experience and one year of experience ten times:  They keep 
g
etting cases that are exactly the same except for the name of the corporation.  I often wonder why they're still writing opinions from scratch when they come to the same result and take so long; they have word processors, so they should load standard para
graphs and then do their opinions by selecting from a menu.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 27\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 There are, after all, only two possible rulings on a motion for anything -\~- it's either granted, or it's denied -\~
- and the recurring issues have well established standards the court is required to consider.  Probably the most frequent issue they decide is the motion for preliminary injunction:  Every time the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Wall Street Journal}{\f1\cgrid0 
 says there's going to be a tender offer for a company, at least one of its stockholders files a class action to
 enjoin the deal.  There are three points a party has to prove to get a preliminary injunction, so the Chancery Court should have a one-page preliminary injunction opinion form that has, for each of those three questions, a "no" box and a "yes" box with a
 blank next to it for the judge to fill in the fact that proved that point.  Then the word processor could spit out the standardized preliminary injunction opinion with those customizations -\~
- "You may have already won a preliminary injunction, Plaintiff Insert Name Here" -\~- and citations to the latest precedents on each point.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 28\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 So why don't they do that, if it would be easier and faster?  Because the big legal business in Delaware is corporation litigation, and nobody here wants to streamline the 
process and so cut down on the profits from it.  Most lawyers in Wilmington (which is the bulk of the lawyers in Delaware, using that word in several different senses) are or want to be local counsel for out-of-state lawyers in corporation cases; the ethi
c
s rules governing lawyers say they can't split fees except in the same proportions they split the work, and the only work local counsel can usually claim to do is supply the expertise on local practice and precedents.  Because the procedural rules in Supe
r
ior Court are very similar to those of the federal courts, and the Chancery Court rules are virtually identical to the federal rules, lawyers from anywhere in the country already know as much as they need to about local practice here, so all that's left f
o
r local counsel to do is provide gossip about the judge or other lawyers in the case and citations to prior opinions that have not been published in the national reporters.  So Chancery Court issues tons of opinions that aren't published, say the same thi
ng over and over again, and give local counsel the right to claim a large percentage of the fee for reviewing pertinent opinions.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 29\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Delaware is the corporation capital, and some writers have said corporation whore, of the country:  More corporations 
are chartered here than in all the other states put together, and Delaware actively encourages that with its laws governing corporate affairs and taxes.  When you're going to sue a corporation, you have a choice about where to do it, and one of the choice
s is always a court in the state where the corporation is chartered, whether it does any business there or not.  So most corporations can be sued in Delaware because they're incorporated here.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 30\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Until November 1991 everybody knew a corporation could 
always sue somebody else in the state where the corporation plaintiff was chartered, but then the Superior Court handed down a decision throwing out a case filed by a Delaware corporation against a whole slew of insurance companies for not covering claims
 against the plaintiff for hazardous waste dumps.  The Chancery Court would never have made a ruling like that, and the lawyers here are hopping and howling at the prospect of losing the chance to be local counsel in some of those cases -\~
- they're trying to get the legislature to pass a law guaranteeing the "right" of a Delaware corporation to drag defendants into Delaware courts whenever they want to.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 31\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Remember that most Delaware lawyers want to be local counsel in corporate cases, and a lawyer who
 goes up against corporations will be blacklisted and never be hired to represent corporations.  A plaintiff in a personal injury suit sues whoever did the injury, but in effect the suit is usually against an insurance company -\~
- in a car accident case, i
t's the auto insurance; in a medical malpractice case, its the doctor's professional insurance; in a product liability or slip-and-fall case, it's the casualty insurance; and in tender-offer cases, it's the directors' E&O insurance -\~
- so insurance compani
es pay the lawyers in many cases.  The bottom line is that a person in Delaware who wants to file a personal injury suit can't usually find a good lawyer here to do it, because the lawyers don't want to go up against the insurance companies and run the ri
sk of never being hired by those companies in the future.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 32\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
The United States was founded on the idea of individuals' rights, but in Delaware corporations count for more than people do now.  Take the top state officials:  The governor and lieutenant 
governor are elected separately, so we can, and recently did, have a governor who was a Republican and a lieutenant who was a Democrat.  The governor appoints the Secretary of State, who regulates corporations -\~
- entities that contribute lots of money to 
campaigns but can't vote and usually aren't in Delaware anyhow.  If something happens to incapacitate the governor and lieutenant governor, the Secretary of State becomes governor; if something happens to him, the AG elected by the people becomes governor
.  That shows that Delaware puts the interests of corporations ahead of the interests of voting individuals.  Thomas Jefferson and Abraham Lincoln must be spinning in their graves.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 33\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 My civil procedure professor used to joke about the "lawyers' full-
employment act," and nowhere does that concept command more respect than in Delaware.  Non-Delaware lawyers working inside companies here usually don't bother to apply for admission to the Delaware bar, and swell its ranks, because the Bar Association and
 every other privilege extended to lawyers is equally open to lawyers working, but not admitted to practice, here.  One reason there are never very many lawyers in the General Assembly is that there are not enough lawyer to spare -\~
- you can make a lot more money double-billing clients in Wilmington than driving down to Dover to sit in the legislature.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 34\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Ever since }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Marbury v. Madison}{\f1\cgrid0  it's been accepted that the judiciary can overrule the executive, but in the federal system Congress can usually overru
le the Supreme Court legislatively.  But in Delaware if the legislature passes a law that disfavors lawyers or that lawyers disfavor, the AG invalidates it; so, contrary to the theory of tripartite government with checks and balances, we have a member of 
the executive exercising ultimate control over the legislature.  Spin, Tom.  Spin, Abe.  Spin, spin, spin.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 35\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 One novel aspect to the old-boy network in Delaware is that it's easier here for a woman to become a judge than a senior partner in a big law
 firm.  Although there has not yet been a female justice on the Supreme Court, there are women on the benches of the other courts.  With two notable exceptions, they are mostly women who had been with largish local firms long enough that the firms faced t
h
e prospect of making them senior partners, and that wouldn't do; so the senior partners used their influence to have the women appointed judges, because Delaware is a state where judges are appointed, not elected.  The two exceptions are Vice Chancellor C
a
rolyn Berger, whose husband Fred S. Silverman is AG Oberly's right-hand-man and actually runs the Dept. of Justice, and Judge Jane R. Roth, who is now on the bench of the Third Circuit federal appellate court but was until recently one of the federal Dist
rict Court judges here and whose husband is Delaware's Republican in the U.\~S. Senate, William V. Roth Jr.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 36\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 1:\'b6}}\faauto\ls2\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 So the legal system in Delaware is like a medieval fiefdom.  He who pays the piper calls the tune, and here that's the out-of-state corporati
ons and their lawyers.  The citizens are in the same predicament as the serfs when itinerant knights employed by absentee overlords rampaged across the land, destroying crops, herds, and sometimes the villeins themselves while fighting each other over eso
teric points of honor nobody ever explained to the peasants because it had nothing to do with them anyhow.
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par \sect }\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain \qc \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\f1\cgrid0 CHAPTER  II.  The best politicians money can buy
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 1\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 A 
people gets the kind of government it deserves and deserves the kind of government it gets.  If you believe in karma, you have to wonder what evil deeds Delawareans committed in former lives to deserve the kind of government they've got.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 2\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Although parts of the story were told to me by various people, the following account of what happened in 1966 and 1976 is taken mostly from Joseph Donald Craven's 1978 book }{
\f1\ul\cgrid0 All Honorable Men}{\f1\cgrid0 .  There are many parallels between this book about what happened to me at E.\~F. Hutton and that book about what happened to him in the antiwar movement in Delaware.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 3\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Craven was a lawyer who was elected AG in 1954, the only Democrat to win that office between 1912 and 1974.  Despite having been a stalwart Democrat from chil
dhood, by 1966 Craven realized that, no matter whether the players labeled themselves Republicans or Democrats, in Delaware there was only one political party, and that was the Establishment.  So he helped start the Constitution Party to run antiwar candi
dates for the U.\~S. Senate and House in that year's election.  AG David P. Buckson and both Senators then were Republicans, and the Congressman and Governor were Democrats.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 4\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 At that time Delaware had no provision for independent candidates or write-i
n votes, so the only way a person could be a candidate was to be nominated by a political party.  Under the law in effect since 1955, to rate a place on the ballot for its nominee a party had to submit petitions signed by 500 citizens of one county and 25
0 citizens each of the other two counties; that's what minority parties had been doing for a decade to be on statewide ballots, but none of their candidates had gotten as many as 500 votes, so they hadn't been a real threat to the Establishment.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 5\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In 
March the Constitution Party put an announcement in the newspaper and started collecting signatures door-to-door.  In May the Democrats introduced in the General Assembly a bill changing the law to require any new political party to submit signatures of 5
0
 citizens of each senatorial district, and each of those signers had to be registered to vote but not registered as a member of any other political party.  There were then only four categories for registration: Democrat, Republican, Independent, and Decli
ne; so the signatories had to be registered as Independents or Declines.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 6\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The last date for changing registrations that year was 23 July.  The General Assembly Would adjourn on 17 June, and the state constitution provided that no bill could become la
w after the Assembly adjourned unless the Governor signed it within 30 days of the adjournment.  The senate passed the bill on 6 June, and the house on 16 June; the Governor didn't sign it until 21 July, which was 34 days after the legislature adjourned a
nd only 2 days before the deadline to change registrations.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 7\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Of course the Constitution Party did not have enough signatures of voters not registered as Democrats or Republicans, so the elections clerks refused to include its candidates on the ballot
s.  The Party sued those clerks in Superior Court, which kicked the case upstairs to the state Supreme Court; although by law the AG is required to represent all public officers, in this suit the clerks were represented by William S. Potter who happened t
o be Delaware's Democratic National Committeeman, and he had also been the lawyer who had won the earlier case ruling that the AG had to represent public officers, so he must have known what he was doing was illegal.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 8\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 There were three justices on the
 panel that heard the case: Chief Justice Wolcott was a friend of Potter's and a former partner in Potter's firm who was appointed by the former governor, the same Democrat who had appointed Justice Carey and was a close friend of Lyndon Johnson's, and Ju
s
tice Herrman had been appointed by the Democrat who was then governor.  On 14 October the court ruled unanimously against the Constitution Party and never addressed the fact that the bill under which the clerks rejected the Party's petitions hadn't ever b
ecome law because the governor waited too long to sign it.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 9\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 It was too late by then to appeal that decision to the U.\~
S. Supreme Court before the 8 November election.  The polls showed the Republicans' incumbent candidates for Senator and AG leading,
 and the Democrats' incumbent candidate for Representative was ahead of the Republican.  On 28 October the Constitution Party publicly asked its supporters to vote for the Republican candidates.  The Republicans won all six statewide offices by the larges
t
 margins in Delaware's history, ten times what the Democrats' majorities had been in 1960.  Ironically enough, in sending that message to the supposedly warmongering Democrats, Delawareans elected to Congress a Republican who campaigned on a platform that
 LBJ had not been warlike enough in Vietnam: now-Senator Roth.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 10\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In October 1968 the U.\~
S. Supreme Court invalidated as unconstitutional an Ohio statute that prevented write-in votes and required all parties except the two major ones to submit petitions to get a candidate on the ballot.  In 1974 the U.\~
S. Supreme Court invalidated as unconstitutional a California statute that kept an independent candidate from being on a ballot without a political party's endorsement.  Those rulings [}{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Williams v. Rhodes}{\f1\cgrid0 , 393 U.S. 23 (1968); }
{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Storer v. Brown}{\f1\cgrid0 , 415 U.S. 724 (1974)] meant Delaware's whole election law, in effect since 1955, was unconstitutional.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 11\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Sordid as it is -\~- and that was just the, you should pardon the expression, high points of what happened -\~
- that story by itself might not prove how the Establishment pulls together to disenfranchise Delawareans, but then it happened again:
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 12\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In the spring of 1976 Joseph F. McInerney was unsuccessful in getting the Democrats' nomination for the U.\~S.
 Senate, so he started the Delaware Party, and in May it nominated him and other candidates for that November's election.  In June the General Assembly passed, and the Democratic governor signed, a bill changing the law so as to make it harder for the Del
aware Party to get its candidates on the ballot.  The Party then asked Democratic AG Richard R. Wier Jr. for a ruling on the constitutionality of that law, and on August 30 he issued a written opinion to the state election commissioner citing }{
\f1\ul\cgrid0 Williams}{\f1\cgrid0  and }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Storer}{\f1\cgrid0  and ruling the new law valid; remember that in Delaware the AG's opinions have the force of law.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 13\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 On 31 August McInerney sued the election commissioner and other officials, in federal court in Wilmington, to put him on the ballot as the nomin
ee of the Delaware Party.  AG Wier, representing the defendants, conceded without argument that the new Delaware statute was unconstitutional.  On September 14 the federal court invalidated the statute and ordered the elections officials to put McInerney 
on the ballot.  Two years later AG Wier ran for re-election, and that's where Craven's book ended.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 14\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In the 1982 election, two Democrats were elected who figure prominently in this book:  Oberly became AG by a margin of 1177 votes over the Republican
, with the American Party candidate and the Libertarian Party candidate totaling 1565 votes, and Thomas R. Carper became the Congressman, with Roth elected to the Senate.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 15\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 That was around the time Carper divorced his first wife.  I haven't heard an
y rumor that he beats his current wife, but several people who were their neighbors have told me he used to beat his first wife, and in their written settlement agreement he paid extra for her promise not to mention it anymore, and they said they knew tha
t
 from their own observations and from what she told them.  During the 1990 campaign, Carper's opponents' campaign managers told me that was true and that they had documentation that as early as his college days he beat up on the women he dated before he w
as married.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 16\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
When I was checking dates for this section, I couldn't find the date of that divorce, so I called the public library in Wilmington and asked.  That library's research desk is superlative -\~- they take inquiries over the phone, and they'
ve often answered such obscure trivia questions for me that I was almost embarrassed to ask them.  After researching the question for most of a day, they called back to say Carper's divorce was between 1982 and 1984, but they couldn't find any reference t
o it anywhere, and they'd even called the local newspaper.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 17\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I hadn't really cared at first, but that made me start wondering:  }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Who's Who}{\f1\cgrid0 
 includes divorce dates in its listings (mine's in there), everybody knows Carper's been divorced, he's held high
 federal office since 1982, and he's already announced he's the Democratic candidate for governor this year, so he's a public figure whose biographical statistics are in the public domain -\~
- why the mystery?  So I called his office here and asked what yea
r he divorced his first wife, and his staff got all bent out of shape.  They asked for my name, and I wouldn't give it, but I told them I was a registered voter who wanted to know.  That drove them crazier.  When one of them asked why I wanted to know, I 
s
aid it was biographical info for an article I'm writing about the candidates in this year's election.  Not only wouldn't they tell me when the divorce was, but then they wouldn't even talk to me anymore and said I couldn't talk to anyone but Carper's pres
s secretary in Washington!  Now I'm very curious about what Carper is trying to hide.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 18\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Anyhow, in 1986 Oberly was re-elected AG with 915 votes more than the Republican, and American Party candidate David S. DeRiemer got 1133 votes.  DeRiemer is a co
lorful character, a businessman from the southern part of the state who feels so strongly about his rights that in 1988 he went to jail rather than agree the state could require him to have its permission, in the form of a driver's license, to drive a car
.
  He's not a lawyer, and he doesn't drive anymore.  His platform was to do away with the Federal Reserve Bank, but he never explained how Delaware's AG could affect the Federal Reserve; he has himself told me all the federal courts in the country are ille
gal because they're supposed to be the judicial branch, but they've gone over to the executive branch, as evidenced by the fact that they all have U.\~
S. flags with gold fringes around them, and only the executive branch is allowed to have gold fringes on its flags.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 19\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
After the 1986 election, DeRiemer joined the Libertarian Party, and he wanted to be its AG candidate in 1990.  I didn't know about that in late 1989 when the Delaware Libertarian Party asked me to be its AG candidate, and I'd already agre
ed before I found out.  Meanwhile, Oberly had decided to run for a third term:  No Delaware AG had ever run for a third term, although nothing in the state constitution or laws forbids it; before Oberly, the only three who had run for a second term were: 
Buckson, who cashed in on the 1966 Republican landslide; Wier, who lost to Richard S. Gebelein in 1978; and Gebelein, who lost to Oberly in 1982 and is now a Superior Court judge.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 20\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In the grand tradition of Delaware politics, where the Establishment
 closes ranks against outsiders of any political persuasion, Oberly played both ends against the middle by cutting deals with both the Democrats and the Republicans to get re-elected.  I heard each of the following stories from more than one member of the
 old guard of the respective party, who resented the way Oberly used the power of his office to preempt their parties out from under them, as well as from various lawyers and reporters who were outside observers.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 21\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Delaware law limits a governor to t
wo four-year terms.  In 1988 Republican Michael Castle was re-elected, and Republican Dale E. Wolf was elected lieutenant governor.  The lt. governor had been Democrat S. B. "Landslide" Woo, so called because he won by a handful of votes on the recount of
 the 1984 election, but in 1988 he ran against Roth for the Senate.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 22\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Delaware has some fairly specific campaign-financing laws on its books, but like many sections of the Delaware Code, those statutes are considered unconstitutional, and therefore u
nenforceable, except when Oberly wants to convict a potential political rival.  He is on record calling those statutes invalid insofar as they limit the amount he, as a candidate, can spend on his campaign.  One provision prohibits campaign contributions 
of more than $1000 to statewide candidates.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 23\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
In 1988 Castle's campaign committee had more than enough money for his re-election, but Wolf's didn't have enough for his harder-fought campaign, so Castle's committee covered some of Wolf's campaign expe
nditures, and the Democrat Wolf beat filed a complaint for violation of that provision.  You know who enforces those laws: AG Oberly.  He had spent the past couple of years convicting the Democrats who had controlled the state party of picayune violations
 of the contribution laws, so they were forced out of politics and, in one or two cases, went to jail.  Now the Democrats wanted him to turn that same law against Wolf, who was being groomed to be the Republicans' candidate for governor in 1992.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 24\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
The deal Oberly made with the Republicans was that he would clear Wolf of those charges, and the Republicans would run a nonviable candidate for AG in 1990, and if Wolf became governor in 1992 he would appoint Oberly a judge.  After the Republicans did in
d
eed nominate a stalking horse, Wilmington lawyer F. L. Peter Stone, on 1 May 1990 Oberly issued an opinion clearing Wolf.  How the Democrats did howl!  But the funniest part is that Wolf's other political problems caught up with him, and the Republicans d
umped him and nominated Realtor B. Gary Scott.  And Buckson got thrown off the bench of the Family Court for running for it without first resigning.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 25\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 One of the reasons I believe that story is it fits all the circumstantial evidence.  There's no que
stion Oberly has admitted publicly he wants to be a judge when he leaves the AG's office.  Had the Republicans wanted their AG candidate elected in 1990, Gov. Castle could have appointed Oberly a judge in 1989 and then appointed a Republican to fill out t
h
e term, and that Republican would have come into the 1990 campaign as an incumbent and surely have won re-election.  But the charges against Wolf were still pending, and more Delaware voters are registered as Democrats than as Republicans:  They would hav
e
 resented Oberly's selling them out, if he dismissed those charges on his way out or the new AG dismissed them on the way in, and so voted against Wolf as a backlash.  Nor is there any other reasonable explanation for nominating Stone, who is a nice guy b
u
t doesn't know which end is up; there were Republicans who had not only sufficient legal experience but also the required public relations skills:  They should have nominated DAG M. Jane Brady to run against Oberly instead of against Senator Joseph R. Bid
en.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 26\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
The deal Oberly made with the Democrats was he would help Carper oust the existing state party leaders, and if Carper was elected governor in 1992 he would appoint Oberly a judge.  The Democrats were mad at Oberly for prosecuting party leaders,
 some for petty campaign financing violations and others for drunk driving.  When Oberly was himself arrested for drunk driving, however, he had the charges dropped, and when his chief deputy Silverman was charged with hit-and-run, they'd had those charge
s
 dropped, too.  Carper couldn't have taken over the party if Oberly hadn't cleared the way for him:  The criminal prosecutions not only removed some major players but also intimidated everyone who was left.  You could have made a fortune selling Maalox to
 Delaware Democrats between 1988 and 1990.  Wilmington plumber Daniel D. Rappa made a valiant, but doomed, last-ditch effort by running against Carper in the 1990 primary.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 27\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 No sketch of Delaware's political scene would be complete without some menti
on of the media situation:  There is no television station in Delaware, and there are no competing newspapers.  Most people have cable tv, and there's only one carrier serving each area; downstate gets broadcast channels from Salisbury MD, and Wilmington 
g
ets the Philadelphia PA channels and the NJ PBS channel.  The ABC and PBS stations in Philly have studios in Wilmington, but Delaware and southern New Jersey get short shrift in the coverage on all Philly stations.  (Northern Jersey gets just as little co
verage from the New York City stations that supposedly serve it.)  With an antenna in Wilmington you can pick up the Baltimore channels.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 28\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The cable carrier in Wilmington is Heritage, and downstate it's mostly Storer.  The utilities commission that s
et the terms with the carriers sold out the citizenry by not providing for free public access.  There's only leased access, and Heritage keeps raising its rates and downgrading its production services, thus decreasing access.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 29\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 There's only one daily newspaper left in Wilmington, the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 News Journal}{\f1\cgrid0  owned by Gannett, and the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Delaware State News}{\f1\cgrid0 
 is published in Dover.  There are several radio stations around the state, and they're the best source of local Delaware news.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 30\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 2:\'b6}}\faauto\ls3\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 News Journal}{\f1\cgrid0  is the h
andmaiden of the Establishment and generally manipulates its coverage to present the party line.  During the 1990 campaign it endorsed Oberly and mostly ignored my candidacy except for an occasional deliberate distortion of the facts.  The PBS station ren
e
ged on its promise to include me in its candidates' debate, apparently on Oberly's instructions, and the ABC station refused to let me debate Oberly and Stone, but after I complained to the FCC, the station put me on for an equal amount of time weeks late
r
.  Storer refused to accept my commercials until the FCC told them the law required them to, but they still refused to sell me the time slots I wanted.  The radio stations were unfailingly cooperative, and WILM was unexpectedly supportive.  At a candidate
s
' debate sponsored by a radio station in Dover I met the president of Delaware's chapter of NOW, and he endorsed me on the air after the debate.  In May 1991 I ran into him, and he said afterward Oberly called him and said as AG he could make things bad f
or NOW for endorsing me.  I was flattered.
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par \sect }\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain \qc \li0\ri14\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin14\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\f1\cgrid0 CHAPTER  III.  The chits hit the fan
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 1\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In early 1984 I was living in Maryland and working as a tax law editor at the Bureau of National Affairs, an employee-owned publishing house in Washington originally related to }{
\f1\ul\cgrid0 U.S. News & World Report}{\f1\cgrid0 , but I was looking for another job; I liked the one I had, but it didn't pay enough.  One of the people I'd sent a r\'e9sum\'e9
 was David J. Garrett, a partner at the Wilmington law firm Potter, Anderson & Corroon, who had led a seminar I'd taken on estate and gift taxation.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 2\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 At work one day I got a phone call from a man who said he was Paul Butler with E.\~
F. Hutton Trust Company, and I might be interested in a job he had open.  In those days, when Hutton talk
ed, people still listened.  Butler said he'd had lunch with Garrett, who told him I was looking for a job, and the one at Hutton wasn't the kind I'd talked to Garrett about, but he'd like to tell me about it.  We discussed it a little, and when he invited
 me to Wilmington for an interview, I accepted.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 3\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
At the interview, Butler outlined the Trust Company's history:  After some months of handling only pension trusts, the Trust Company wanted to get into personal trusts, so it had hired Butler away from
 one of the local banks to head the personal trust department; he'd come on board the beginning of 1984 and had been trying to hire two people to work for him: one to stay inside and mostly draft documents, which is what they were considering me for, and 
o
ne to travel around the country teaching Hutton's brokerage house employees about trusts.  In a year or so they might add an office on the West Coast, and in about three years Butler would be retiring; I figured that would give me time to learn what I nee
d
ed to from Butler, and I'd either get to run the West Coast Office or get his job when he left.  What they were proposing was a new concept in personal trusts, and I really liked the idea of getting in on the ground floor of that, but with such a big comp
any behind us that we could afford to do it right.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 4\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
At that interview I met Jay Abbes, the Trust Company's CEO, and I may have met Bill Hitchcock, its president and COO.  I felt uncomfortable with Abbes; at first I thought he'd taken a dislike to me,
 but then I decided it was Butler he was down on, and I'd just wandered into the firing line.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 5\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 They offered me the job, with a salary I probably couldn't have refused even if I hadn't liked the job so much, and I accepted, to start work a few weeks 
later on 30 April.  I gave notice at BNA and started a Wilmington realtor looking for a house.  On my next-to-last day of work at BNA, they threw me a going-away party, and I got home in one of those mixed moods: touched by how happy my BNA friends were f
or me and sad to be leaving them but excited about the prospects at Hutton.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 6\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 There was a message on my answering machine from Abbes asking me when I'd been planning to start work, telling me Butler was leaving in a reorganization that would eliminate
 the job he'd hired me for, and saying we could discuss it when I got to Wilmington.  Fat chance!  I felt like I'd been punched in the stomach, and I couldn't wait that long to know whether I still had a job at Hutton, so I called Abbes back right then.  
H
e kept talking around most of what I wanted to know, but he did confirm that I still had a job, on the same terms, but that it would be a different job:  Butler would be staying on for a few months, but then I'd be in charge of personal trusts; and I'd st
ill come on as assistant corporate secretary, but when Butler left I'd succeed him as secretary.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 7\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 So from the first day I reported to work at Hutton, I already knew there was a lot of internal political stuff going on behind the scenes, and I kept my
 eyes and ears open in self defense.  I learned overlapping parts of the following story from Abbes, Hitchcock, and the Trust Company's other directors, from Hutton people in New York and around the country, from Wilmington lawyers in several of the firms
 
hired to charter the Trust Company, from the Delaware bank examiners who audited the Trust Company, from the documents setting up Hutton Trust Company and Hutton Bank that Hitchcock showed me, and from the Trust Company's corporate records that were turne
d over to me when I became secretary.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 8\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The entity most people thought of as E.\~F. Hutton, the one that advertised in the commercials about people listening, was the brokerage firm whose real name was E.\~
F. Hutton & Co. Inc.  It was a Delaware corporation all of whose stock was owned by E.\~
F. Hutton Group Inc., a Delaware holding company whose stock was publicly owned and traded on the New York Stock Exchange.  So if you bought Hutton stock, you were buyin
g shares of Group, but if you bought stock through a Hutton office, it was Hutton & Co. that was your broker.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 9\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Hutton Group also owned some other corporations, including E.\~F. Hutton Life Insurance Company and some investment managers and funds.  Th
e chairman of Hutton Group's board of directors was Robert Fomon, and the president of Hutton & Co. was Scott Pierce, who was then-VP George Bush's brother-in-law.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 10\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Much of the money in this country is in pension plans, most of them now "qualified 
plans" under the federal pension laws known as "ERISA."  That money isn't tied up, out of circulation, though -\~
- it's invested in everything from real estate and mutual funds to race horses and precious gems.  Managing those investments and doing the pape
rwork for both pay-ins and pay-outs is also big business, because the fees for management and administration are usually a percentage of the amount in the fund, and even a small percent of a billion dollars is a lot of money.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 11\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 By the early 1980s Hu
tton, like the other financial institutions, derived a significant portion of its income from pension funds, either as fees for managing the investments by deciding what stocks or bonds to buy or as commissions for being the broker that actually traded th
e
 securities.  It's a conflict of interests, prohibited by law, for the same entity to manage the investments and get a brokerage commission, for the same reasons it's now illegal for a Justice of the Peace's salary to be a percentage of the traffic fines 
the JP imposes.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 12\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
What happens in many companies is that a few, usually senior management, employees are the trustees for the fund, so they make the investment decisions, and the fund has a broker who buys and sells as directed by the trustees.  That
's the theory, at least, but what often happens is the committee of trustees don't know enough, or have enough time outside of their work, to make investment decisions, so they take the broker's advice, and that's not necessarily bad.  But to keep the bro
kers honest, trustees with good sense often deal with several brokers and play them off against each other, and that's free-market competition and good for everyone except the greedier brokers.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 13\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 What Hutton wanted was to become trustee for the pensi
on funds, so it could collect the trustee's fee for managing the investments, and hire only itself as broker, so it could continue to collect the brokerage commission on every transaction.  It's like the way they used to catch monkeys for zoos, where they
 
would cut holes, a tad bigger than a grown monkey's paw, in coconuts, empty them out, put some dried rice inside, and chain them to a tree trunk; at night the monkeys would come, reach inside for the rice, not be able to get their fists out, and be sittin
g
 there with their paws stuck in the coconuts in the morning, when the hunters would come throw a net over them.  The monkeys were too greedy to let go of the rice even to get free, and Hutton was too greedy to let go of the brokerage commissions even to g
et the larger trustees' fees.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 14\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
So someone came up with the brilliant idea to set up a separate Hutton entity to be trustee of the pension funds, and collect fees for that, and put all the brokerage through Hutton & Co.  That entity would be E.\~F. Hu
tton Trust Company, and to be able to act as trustee it would have to be some kind of bank.  Hutton explored incorporating a bank in several states, but the first few didn't have the right combination of state laws and susceptible officials.  Then Hutton 
l
ooked at Delaware, which was offering some tax and legal incentives to lure companies to Wilmington; you may remember that some credit card companies moved their headquarters to Delaware then to take advantage of those incentives and Delaware's statutes a
llowing special-purpose banks and unlimited interest rates.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 15\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Hutton hired about five different Wilmington law firms, one after another, to charter its bank, but the first four (including Potter, Anderson & Corroon and, as someone told me, Richards, 
Layton & Finger and maybe Prickett, Jones, Elliott, Kristol & Schnee) were unsuccessful: some because they filed the application, but it was denied, and some because the other banks they represented objected, so they withdrew from filing Hutton's applicat
ion.  I heard that of those four, only Potter Anderson returned Hutton's retainer; the others kept what they'd been paid even though they failed to charter the bank.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 16\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Then Hutton hired the Wilmington office of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, b
y some measures the biggest law firm in the country, and certainly preeminent in corporation law.  Two of Skadden's senior partners were Rodman Ward Jr. and Irving S. Shapiro.  Ward is a formidable lawyer who coauthors one of the leading treatises on corp
oration law; he's also an interesting person, but he's so smart he sees what's coming so many moves ahead of where you are that it's scary sometimes.  Shapiro is either a fool or senile, but he used to be du\~
Pont's CEO, so he's an 800-pound gorilla in Delaw
are; if you want to see what the Second Coming will be like, just watch how everybody here acts around Shapiro.  His value at Skadden is not his minimal ability as a lawyer but his clout with the authorities.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 17\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Shapiro first got the other banks in t
own, and their Delaware Bankers' Association, to back off in their opposition to letting Hutton in, and then he got Delaware's Bank Commissioner John E. Malarkey to grant Hutton two applications: one for a bank and the second for the Trust Company.  Hutto
n
 Bank never did much, but Hutton considered using it in several packages that didn't get off the drawing board; we discussed such plans as having it lend money to customers who would then use that money to buy stock or insurance from Hutton, either direct
ly or through trusts at Hutton, for example.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 18\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
The Bank's affairs were handled by its two officers: the Trust Company's president Hitchcock and Richard Roeder at Hutton in New York.  Hitchcock showed me the papers setting up the Bank, and Roeder and 
I had some discussions about it, but I didn't pry into the matter, because it wasn't my problem.  I do remember that what business the Bank did was a few loans to some Hutton VIPs, but there were some legal irregularities about the situation, and a major 
r
eason we didn't do more with the Bank was that if it got active those defects might come to the attention of the regulatory authorities when they audited.  Some of the irregularities had to do with doing business before the law was changed to allow it, an
d when the law was changed, it didn't cover Hutton Bank, but I'll come back to that later.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 19\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Once Shapiro got the Trust Company chartered as a Delaware limited-purpose trust company in July 1982, other Skadden lawyers prepared the usual corporate start-up documents and turned them over to Hutton.  From then on, Hutton would call Skadden only when
 Hutton got into trouble with Commissioner Malarkey and couldn't get out of it without Shapiro's influence.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 20\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Hutton hired Hitchcock to be nominal head of the Trust Company; he had worked for State Street Bank in Boston for a long time, and Hutton br
ought in an outsider to be president so it would look as if the Trust Company was separate from the brokerage firm.  In fact, though, as vice-chairman of its board James C. Lockwood was in charge of the Trust Company.  Lockwood was the head of Hutton & Co
.
's Consulting Services Division, a group that mostly charged fees for advising people which investment managers to hire:  If the manager hired was a Hutton subsidiary, then Hutton got the management fee, and if the manager was not a Hutton affiliate, it b
rokered the investments through Hutton, so Hutton got the brokerage commissions.  It was CSD's relationships with the pension funds that sparked the idea of the Trust Company, and Lockwood was responsible for it. \tab 
He and two of his CSD executives, John Ellis and Len Reinhart, were on the Trust Company's board of directors by the time I got there.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 21\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Lockwood and the rest of CSD would come to Wilmington to share space with the Trust Company, and they would both move into offices in a new building on the
 Market Street Mall next to the Grand Opera House the day I started work in 1984, but when the Trust Company started in summer 1982 it was just Hitchcock and a few female clerical employees.  He selected a software system called SEI and started accepting 
pension trusts.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 22\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Under the governing laws, regulations, and guidelines, as a trustee the Trust Company had to make both investment decisions and pay-out decisions in the best interests of the trust's beneficiaries, but Hutton never intended for the 
Trust Company to make those decisions, so no mechanisms were ever set up for them.  Instead, once an account executive from the brokerage firm would sign a trust client up with the Trust Company, the Trust Company would make whatever investments and distr
ibutions that AE told it to:  That violated the laws requiring a trustee to exercise responsibility for the trust and also the laws against self-dealing.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 23\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Hutton had picked Hitchcock thinking he was too wimpy to give Lockwood any back-talk but experienced enough to run the operation -\~
- they were only half right:  Hitchcock lacked the intestinal fortitude to do anything but follow orders, and without experienced bankers making the management decisions, he was useless.  Lockwood lacked the banking exp
erience to know what bank operations were supposed to look like, so he couldn't direct Hitchcock in enough detail, and then Lockwood suddenly fell sick -\~
- I think it was a heart attack, but then he had prostate trouble, and he was incapacitated for many, many months -\~
- and nearly died; when it was feared he would die, or at least never be able to work again, it was necessary to put someone else in charge of the Trust Company.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 24\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 So Hutton promoted Abbes, who had been on the board since the beginning
; he replaced Lockwood as vice-chairman and CEO on 12 October 1983, Hitchcock remained president and COO, and Thomas P. Lynch of Hutton Group remained chairman.  Abbes was a company man in every respect, so he followed Hutton's policy of not telling anyon
e
 more than he had to:  In Hutton's world, managers didn't let subordinates know what was going on so they couldn't demand a piece of the action for carrying out the schemes, and they didn't put anything in the record that would expose their superiors to l
i
ability; when there was a problem, the middle-level manager would take the fall, and whatever higher-ups he was protecting would make sure he had a soft place to fall, often as a consultant to one of the investment management firms Hutton dealt with, if i
t wasn't possible to move him someplace else within Hutton itself.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 25\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Hutton Trust was never anything but a fa\'e7ade of a trust company -\~- there was no substance to it, and not even much form.  It performed no personnel functions, for example, and had 
no operational bank accounts and no petty cash.  When an employee was hired, Hutton & Co.'s forms for a brokerage firm employee were completed and forwarded to New York, and then the person went on the payroll and was paid on Hutton & Co. checks.  All rei
mbursements and employee benefits came from Hutton & Co.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 26\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Each of Hutton & Co.'s branch offices had a coded office i.d. number comprising one letter [out of eleven or twelve possibilities] designating the geographical region and two digits identifyi
ng the specific office, and that code was used as an address for telexes as well as an administrative identifier.  The Trust Company was treated as a branch office of Hutton & Co. with the code V48, because we were office #48 in the national region; that'
s
 what went on all our personnel and payroll records.  Hutton's brokerage office in Wilmington was coded A81, because it was office #81 in the Atlantic region; it was a satellite of the Philadelphia office coded A09.  There were two brokerage offices in Wa
shington DC, coded C16 and C18 because they were in the Central region, C20 was in Alexandria VA, and C32 was in Bethesda MD.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 27\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Hutton Trust rented a couple of safe deposit boxes and opened three checking accounts, but those weren't operating accounts -\~
- they were for payment of trust distributions.  So when someone was supposed to get a pension payment from a fund trusteed at Hutton Trust, Hutton & Co. would deposit enough money in one of those accounts to cover the payment, and Hutton Trust would c
ut a check to the pensioner, but not necessarily in that order.  Where would Hutton & Co. get the money?  Out of the pension fund, of course.  Wasn't Hutton Trust the trustee and supposed to be holding the fund?  Of course that's what was supposed to be h
appening, but in fact Hutton & Co. never let Hutton Trust near any money except to launder the pay-outs, and that's what's wrong with this picture.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 28\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 When Hitchcock set up the Trust Company's computerized accounting system, it was designed to track w
hat happened in the brokerage firm's computerized system, but there was no electronic connection between the two.  SEI is a perfectly good trust banking software system used by many banks, including some of the best in Wilmington; it has all the capabilit
y any trustee needs, but it's only as good as a user programs it to be, and Hitchcock didn't program it to do much of what it could, and that requires some explanation.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 29\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 For every brokerage customer at Hutton & Co. there was an account in the firm's
 computer to track the trades.  That computer account included the customer's name, address, and social security number as well as the office's code, the AE's code, and the account number; it could be accessed from a Hutton terminal anywhere in the world,
 
but only the AE could authorize trades in the account.  Whenever a trust account was opened at Hutton Trust, Hitchcock's clerks would set up an SEI account under the same number as the brokerage account and enter whatever information they were given about
 the assets in the trust.  If there were assets that weren't securities -\~- such as gemstones, real estate deeds, or promissory notes -\~
- they might be listed in the SEI account, but of course they would not be included in the brokerage account.  When secur
ities were bought or sold in the brokerage account, Hutton Trust would usually get notice of the trade, and Hitchcock's clerks would keyboard that information into the SEI account.  But if assets other than securities were sold, there was no way for the T
r
ust Company to know, because that didn't go through the brokerage firm's computer, so the assets wouldn't be removed from the SEI account; and if anything was bought outside of the brokerage account, including mutual funds that kept their own accounts, th
e
 brokerage firm's computer would report the pay-out of funds, and the SEI account would track that, but whatever assets were bought with the funds would never appear in either account, so according to our records part of the trust's value would have simpl
y disappeared.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 30\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
The important point is that there never were any assets at the Trust Company.  All the assets were in the brokerage accounts at Hutton & Co., and all the Trust Company ever had was the phantom SEI accounts supposedly reflecting whate
ver happened in the brokerage accounts.  The companies the trusts belonged to got monthly statements from the brokerage firm and monthly statements from the Trust Company, and if they didn't match, the customers were likely to complain to their AEs, who w
ould usually complain to the Trust Company.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 31\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
The monthly statements from SEI were printed in bulk by SEI and delivered to us in boxes, and Hutton & Co. sent us copies of the monthly brokerage statement in each account that was coded as a trust accou
nt.  After the AEs started complaining, when there were discrepancies between the two statements Hitchcock and his clerks would white-out the parts of the SEI statements that didn't match and type in the information from the brokerage statement, because t
hey knew whatever the brokerage statement said was what had actually happened in the account.  But they changed only the paper statements and never put the changes in the computer!
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 32\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 It doesn't take an Einstein to figure out that once the two stateme
nts for a trust got out of sync, they would stay that way until at least one of the computerized accounts was changed to bring them back into agreement, but that concept seems to have been beyond everyone at the Trust Company.  By the time I got there in 
s
pring 1984, it was taking about a week each month to white-out and retype the SEI statements for the month, and that's a week with everyone in the operations dept. working all day and half the night and most of the weekend, which added up to a lot of over
time.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 33\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
There was also the problem, actually several problems, that the Trust Company wasn't keeping any tax records.  For one thing, even though the pension trusts were exempt from paying income tax, they still had to file information returns about 
their transactions each year, and you have to keep track of the tax basis of a pension trust's assets, because at some point you end up distributing those assets, and you have to know what they're worth for tax purposes then.  But the Trust Company wasn't
 keeping those records, and the customers kept complaining they couldn't get the information for their annual Forms 5500.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 34\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 A second aspect of the problem was that Hutton Trust had about a dozen "collective funds" that were like mutual funds in that 
the assets from a lot of separate pension plans would be pooled and invested, and the profits would be prorated among the participating plans.  Those were perfectly legal entities, authorized by the Internal Revenue Code and called "pooled income funds," 
a
nd they're tax-exempt, but they have to file information tax returns every year so the IRS can make sure they're complying with all the applicable ERISA and tax laws.  But Hutton had never filed any tax returns for any of its collective funds because neit
her Hitchcock nor anyone else at Hutton knew they were supposed to.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 35\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The third part of the problem didn't appear until we started doing personal trusts, and that was that non-pension trusts have to file tax returns every year and pay taxes on their 
profits.  So just as any individual or corporate taxpayer has to, a non-ERISA trust has to keep track of its tax basis for assets and report not only its income from its investments but also its capital gain on the sale of those assets.  And Hitchcock had
n't activated the fields to keep track of the tax basis and fair market value of trust assets, because that information didn't appear in the brokerage firm's computer.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 36\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Compounding that was the fact that a trust usually has "income beneficiaries," w
ho get the income for some definite or indefinite period of time, and "remaindermen," who get what's left at the end of that period.  A trustee is required by law to keep track of the trust's capital and income separately, because the trust's beneficiarie
s have different interests, with the income beneficiaries entitled to the income and the remaindermen entitled to the capital.  The fiduciary accounting is worse than the London }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Sunday Times}{\f1\cgrid0 
 crossword puzzle, and it's absolutely impossible without the records, but Hitchcock hadn't activated the required data fields in SEI, and neither he nor any of his clerks knew how to keep the records.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 37\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The complexity of the record-keeping and tax-reporting is a large part of the reason fiduciaries get paid such j
uicy trustees' fees, but somehow that concept had escaped the rocket scientists at Hutton, too.  Another reason for the fees is that trustees have to make some hard decisions about distributing money from trusts:  Many trust documents give the trustees a 
l
ot of discretion about making both investments and pay-outs, and if you've ever been in the middle of a family squabble over a legacy you can appreciate that trustees earn their fees.  But Hutton skipped over those difficulties by letting the AE on each a
ccount make all the investment and pay-out decisions, so all Hutton Trust had to do to "earn" its fee was white-out and retype the statements.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 38\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Three unrelated examples will show you why I often felt as if I was working in a Three Stooges comedy instead of a bank:
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 39\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Congressman James T. Broyhill of North Carolina had his share of the money from selling his family's furniture business that he needed to put in a blind trust to avoid conflicts of interest in voting on legislation.  Federal regula
tions cover such trusts and require annual reports, and because such a trust isn't a qualified plan under ERISA, it was considered a personal trust at Hutton Trust.  When Broyhill's money came in, Butler decided to avoid any appearance of self-dealing bet
w
een Hutton Trust and Hutton & Co. by putting it in a non-Hutton mutual fund; Butler chose one, and the AE executed the trade by paying the money out of the brokerage account to the mutual fund, and that was the last we heard of it.  Several months later, 
after Butler was gone from the Trust Company, the AE and Broyhill's lawyer started bugging me to submit the required report, and I couldn't find the assets -\~
- I found Butler's note in the file saying which mutual fund he had picked, but when I asked that mutual fund, they denied having any account in either Broyhill's name or Hutton Trust's.  I finally submitted the report anyway -\~
- after all, as far as Broyhill was concerned the trust was deaf and dumb as well as blind, and it was easy to find out what dividends the fund had paid since the date the money disappeared in that direction -\~
- and things were quiet for several months until Broyhill decided he wanted to move the trust somewhere else because we weren't cooperative enough about providing informatio
n about it.  It took several weeks, but the AE finally found the account at the mutual fund, under Hutton & Co.'s name, closed it, and turned the proceeds over to Broyhill's lawyer.  What's really funny, or scary, is when the AE found the account at the m
utual fund, it was one of three in Hutton & Co.'s name with no indication of what customer they belonged to, and he just left the other two sitting there.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 40\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Mr. & Mrs. Burchard were a retired couple in about their 80s, each of whom had a trust, and m
ost of the assets in the trusts were shares in a bank (I think it was in Illinois, but it might have been somewhere else in the Midwest) that Mrs. Burchard's father had founded and Mr. Burchard had been president of.  They had retired to Arizona, and an A
E
 in Hutton's Mesa office talked them into moving their trusts to Hutton Trust so he could sell the stock and use the proceeds to buy them some annuities from Hutton Life Insurance; the commissions AEs got for selling Hutton insurance were even higher than
 their brokerage commissions.  By the time I found out about the trusts, the AE had already sold the stock, and when I told him annuities were an improper investment for the Burchards, he told me not to worry -\~
- the insurance company wouldn't issue annuiti
es on people their age, so he was going to sell them annuities on their son's life, and when they died the son would inherit and sell the policies and invest in something else, and the AE would collect a commission on each transaction!  That struck me as 
a
n archetypical example of "churning" an account, which means repeatedly liquidating investments and reinvesting the assets to collect commissions on the new investments.  I got into trouble with Abbes for it, but I went over the AE's head to his branch of
f
ice manager, and the BOM did keep the AE from tying the assets up in insurance.  For some reason, every few months the two Burchard trusts would pop up as exceptions in another internal audit, and I'd get a phone call from some Hutton employee somewhere i
n
 the country, and I'd explain what happened, and that person wouldn't bother me about it again.  Then one day I got a phone call from a bank officer at the Illinois bank whose stock they'd owned; when the bank had gone to hold its annual stockholders' mee
t
ing, the Burchards hadn't voted the stock, and without it the bank didn't have a quorum, because between them they'd owned the majority of the stock.  So the bank president had phoned the Burchards and found out what the AE had done and was doing, and he 
threatened to sue on behalf of the Burchards.  I don't know how that situation finally came out, but I've often wondered.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 41\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Mary Alice Anthony had left a trust for her two sons and their children, and an AE in Hutton's Hyannis MA office talked one of
 the sons, Julian Kaiser, into moving "his" half of the trust to Hutton by promising Kaiser to pay him as much of the trust's income as he wanted.  The trust document provided for pay-outs to Kaiser, who was a doctor, or his children if they needed them, 
a
nd "need" was determined under Connecticut law.  Kaiser's children appeared to need the money more than he did, especially as we found in the computer about four brokerage accounts in his name with substantial stock holdings in them, but the AE kept payin
g
 Kaiser all the income, and Abbes and Hitchcock kept letting him, although I kept putting memos in the file saying that was wrong, and the bank examiners kept saying in their audit reports it was wrong.  In February 1986 one of Kaiser's children wrote to 
Hutton Group's then-CEO threatening to sue for the mishandling of the trust, but I never heard how that came out, either.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 42\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Those three situations -\~- involving trusts worth more than a million dollars and trustees' fees of tens of thousands -\~- are 
just the kind of problems any rational person would expect from not having any mechanism for Hutton Trust to track trust assets or supervise investments or distributions, but Hutton still shrugs them off as "typical back-office problems in a new venture" 
according to Shapiro's testimony on 1 October 1991.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 43\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Besides the comic relief, Hutton also provided some romantic interest:  One of the CSD units was Hutton Portfolio Management, and it was headed by Greg Phipps, whom I found very attractive, but wh
en I not too subtly let him know I was interested, he rather more subtly let me know he wasn't, so I didn't embarrass either one of us by pushing it.  For the most part, Hutton employees didn't have much class -\~
- which isn't to say they weren't great to work with and fun to party with, because they were, and the people were part of what I really loved about working there -\~
- but Phipps used an Imari cup for his tea, even when he was alone in his office, you know what I mean?  Once when we went to Hutton he
adquarters in New York to meet with some customers about bringing a big trust in, he took me on a walking tour around Wall Street, including Trinity Church and the Stock Exchange, and told me their history.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 44\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 HPM, the program he ran, supervised AEs 
who had qualified to act as investment managers, instead of brokers, for their customers' Hutton accounts.  So if an account was signed up for HPM, the AE made the buy-sell decisions and executed the trades but received a fee that was a percentage of the 
account's value instead of commissions on each transaction.  Phipps handpicked the AEs who got into the program and supervised their training and their performance, and it was a class act all the way.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 45\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 One of the times he had me speak to a group of 
HPMers about using trusts and the Trust Company was in Washington DC on 20 September 1984.  It was one of those several-day affairs including training sessions and field trips, and one of the trips the day I was there was to the Capitol to meet one of Del
a
ware's Senators and ride the little train under the building.  But when we got to the Capitol, there'd been a bombing in Lebanon or someplace, and the Senators were taking turns being briefed in the little dome-of-silence room that doesn't hold very many 
at a time, and the Senator couldn't make it, so he'd asked Congressman Carper to meet with us instead.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 46\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I'd never taken much of an interest in politics, and although I'd moved to Delaware on 30 June and had recently registered to vote, I didn't yet 
know the name of our only Representative, but I did know we had only one.  When he finally showed up in the small room where we were having soft drinks and cookies, he had his notebook under his arm, and I swear I thought the name on it was "Crapper," but
 I soon picked up that it was actually Carper.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 47\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 He made conversation with the group, much of it about finances -\~- we'd just heard a lecture at the Federal Reserve -\~
- and there was some kidding that the HPMers were from other states, so he was wast
ing his electioneering on them, and I said, "Well, I'm registered to vote in Delaware," and Carper joked, "Then I'll ignore these men and just talk to you."  A little later, after he was told I was one of Hutton Trust's officers, Carper drew me a little a
s
ide and started explaining why he was having trouble getting the legislation we wanted through the Banking Committee.  At first I didn't have the faintest idea what he was talking about, but the way you find things out is by listening, so I did.  When I g
ot back I talked to Hitchcock about it, and he told me Carper was trying to get federal legislation passed that would extend to Hutton Trust and Hutton Bank -\~
- because they had been chartered outside the period to which the "non-bank bank" legislation applied -\~- and then I was able to make sense of what Carper had said about grandfathering.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 48\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
That was around the same time that Hutton Trust acquired a new personal trust client, a corporation named International Development Programs Inc., the chairman of whose board was Wilbur Mills.  An AE named John Jennison, in Hutton's C18 office in D.C. whe
r
e Perry Bacon was BOM, had a client named Barton F. Walker Jr., who was president of Walker & Walker Associates, Inc., in Maryland and one of IDP's principals, so Walker had brought IDP to Jennison.  IDP's president was Thomas M. Owen, whose phone numbers
 
were in Virginia, and its lawyer was Francis L. Jung, who was also general counsel to American Pacific Trading Co. in D.C.  The chairman of AmPac's board was Conrad K. Hausman, who was also one of IDP's principals.  The other two IDP principals I dealt wi
th were E. Doug Ward, executive vp of Astrotech International Corp. in Pennsylvania, and Daniel Craig, president of Norsud Corp. in California.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 49\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The companies these IDPers headed manufactured aircraft, and maybe tanks, guns, and other war toys -\~- t
hey had mostly been pilots in WWII and/or the Korean Conflict, and Hausman had worked for Alexander Haig in Vietnam and then at the White House.  Owen had been on LBJ's re-election committee, and he told some of the best war stories I ever heard: some abo
ut the parties his cousin Tallulah Bankhead used to throw, some about his misadventures as a pilot during the war, some about LBJ, and all of them hilarious.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 50\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 IDP's }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 raison}{\f1\cgrid0  }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 d'\'eatre}{\f1\cgrid0  was to borrow money from the pension funds of companies that manufactu
red industrial, agricultural, and defensive equipment (which we took to mean aircraft, tanks, guns, and related paraphernalia), invest it in U.\~
S. Treasury notes, and lend the interest to developing Third-World nations (mostly in the Middle East and Centra
l America) that would use the money to buy industrial, agricultural, and defensive equipment (wink, nudge), probably from the companies that had anted up their pension funds.  They explained to us that this was all part of President Reagan's plan to cut b
a
ck on foreign aid from the U.S. government and get the private sector more involved; they said they had the required approvals and gave us phone numbers at the State Dept. and White House to check them out, but Abbes forbade me to do any checking:  He sai
d the only checking would be by Hutton & Co.'s president Pierce through Barbara Bush to her husband the VP, and then later he told me we had not just their approval but their encouragement.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 51\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 But the reason IDP had come to the Trust Company then, as they told us, was that they couldn't pry any money loose from the pension funds -\~
- remember I said that's where most of the investment money in the country is, but the trustees have to meet the high standards the law imposes on fiduciaries -\~- so they'd g
one looking for money overseas and found some:  The royal family of Saudi Arabia had a lot of money to invest but couldn't be seen to do so because of the Islamic prohibition against usury, so they had created something called the Crusader Trust, run by o
n
e of the big Swiss banks fronting for them.  The Crusader Trust was willing to lend IDP $100 million for some number of years I've forgotten now, but the Swiss bank insisted on having an American financial institution hold the bag, and IDP had been up one
 
side of Wall Street and down the other and been turned down everywhere.  Then Bush asked Pierce to have Hutton do it, and Fomon agreed and told Abbes to take care of it.  It was, of course, a personal trust, so it fell squarely in my lap, and I had most o
f the dealings with IDP.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 52\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
The last week of October 1984 I had to go to Basel, Switzerland, on rather short notice to meet with Owen, Hausman, Walker, Ward, Craig, and someone from the Swiss bank, and that's when I finally saw the printout of how the
 transaction was supposed to work.  There were two kinds of problems with it:  One was that the bank wanted Hutton to sign as the one liable for paying the interest for the term of the loan and paying back the principal in Swiss francs at the end, so we w
o
uld in effect be guaranteeing not only the interest rate on Treasuries but also the exchange rate, and we wouldn't; the other was that there were so many finders' fees and up-front points to be paid to the various players that it would take every bit of i
n
come from the Treasuries, compounded by being repeatedly reinvested over the term of the loan, to get the principal back to the amount to be repaid, and that didn't leave anything to pay the income taxes with.  When I pointed that out, Owen said, "But we 
don't want to pay any income taxes," and I said, "Nobody wants to pay income taxes, but how do you expect to get out of it?"  So they put me on the telephone to Mills -\~
- whom they always referred to as "the Chairman" with such reverence that Abbes tried teasing them once by referring to Fomon the same way, but they were not amused -\~
- back in the States to find out what the story was on taxes.  That was the only time I ever talked to him, and he didn't have any idea how to get out of the taxes, either, but he said he'd get the guys there working on it.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 53\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 While I was in Basel -\~- I went on Saturday the 27th and came back on Halloween of 1984 -\~
- IDP took very good care of me, and except for when I went back to my hotel to sleep and a couple of hours th
e last afternoon when I walked around town, I was always with one of more of them.  One evening Owen wanted to drive to Zurich for dinner at the Dolder Grand Hotel, so three of us went with him -\~
- that's a whole story of its own, with Owen driving like Ba
rney Oldfield on the autobahn and me falling back on my college German to navigate from an outdated map in the dark!  While we were at the Dolder, Owen told us about the last time he'd been there, when he'd run into the exiled Shah of Iran and they'd talk
ed about the good old days.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 54\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
One day we drove across the corners of Germany and France on a little sightseeing excursion whose purpose seemed to be to let me see everybody's passports when we crossed the borders.  They'd been hinting pretty hard tha
t Hausman was CIA, but I kept acting like I hadn't caught on, and a day or so later Walker finally took me to brunch alone and just told me, but the two things I learned from their passports were that Hausman did, indeed, carry a diplomatic passport and t
hat most of them, especially Owen and Walker, had been in and out of Iran a lot of times over the past year or so.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 55\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 One evening when I got back to my hotel after dinner, there were some urgent messages from Abbes to call back, so I did, and because 
of the time difference he was still in the office.  He got one of Hutton & Co.'s lawyers in New York on the phone with us to read us the riot act for my being there when the last thing the Legal Dept. had told me on Friday was not to go -\~
- they kept referring to IDP's plans as "gun-running" and wanting us to drop IDP as a client, but all we did was quit telling them stuff that was only upsetting them -\~
- but Bacon and Abbes had both told me later on Friday to go anyhow, with authority from Pierce and Fomon
, and Jennison bought my ticket and wired me the money for traveler's checks.  I'll always cherish the part of that phone conversation when Abbes asked the lawyer what they were afraid of, and he answered that after turning my head by getting me away from
 
my own turf and into exotic surroundings IDP might get me to agree to something, to Hutton's detriment, that I wouldn't agree to at home; Abbes said, "If you think that, you don't know Kay very well!"  Abbes knew, from trying to himself, it's virtually im
possible to get me to do anything I don't intend to, and it really touched me to know he had so much faith in me, because by then I had a lot of regard for him, and I still do.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 56\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Some months later we started to realize why the Legal Dept. had been so
 hot about IDP when it hit the papers that Hutton had been involved in the money-laundering scheme the media called "the pizza connection."  IDP kept talking to us for months about doing a deal, but nothing ever came of it.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 57\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Then on 2 May 1985 Pier
ce entered Hutton & Co.'s guilty plea to 2000 counts of federal mail and wire fraud in what came to be referred to as "the check-kiting."  Too much has been written about that for me to have to describe it here; suffice it to say that Hutton had for sever
a
l years taken advantage of the float on checking accounts by drawing checks to customers on accounts in banks at the other end of the country from where the customers were and then depositing the money to cover the checks later.  Many of the AEs were shak
e
n that Hutton had been doing anything so blatantly against both the law and the customers' interests, but I was surprised they were surprised, because it was the same thing Hutton was still doing through the Trust Company, and it was in keeping with every
thing I'd seen of the way Hutton was run.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 58\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Hutton was fined $2 million and agreed to pay up to $8 million in restitution to the banks, but Abbes and the other Hutton higher-ups I dealt with laughed that off as "chump change" compared to the amount H
utton had gained from it.  They were, however, concerned that VP Bush was pissed off at the political flak he was taking for protecting Hutton, so they decided to hire a prominent Democrat to repair the political fences; they ended up paying former AG Gri
f
fin Bell about $2.5 million to handle the damage control.  I can't help wondering if all the members of Congress who were shouting so loud then for someone at Hutton to go to jail would feel the same way now that their own check-kiting at the House bank h
as come to light.  And if Carper hadn't known all along that what Hutton was doing was pretty shady, he has to have known it by the summer of 1985, but he kept trying to help Hutton get more favorable treatment under the federal banking laws.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 59\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls4\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 3:\'b6}}\faauto\ls4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Do you remember in "My Fair Lady" when Professor Higgins said, "The French don't care what they do, as long as they pronounce it correctly"?  That's Hutton all over -\~
- they didn't care that they broke the law, but they got all bent out of shape that the media 
reported they did.  Here's Shapiro's October 1991 testimony about the check-kiting and related scandals:  "Hutton had had a very bad press because of some federal charges, and they were very sensitive about adverse publicity."  "Hutton had had a series of
 bad newspaper notices and was very sensitive to criticism in the press."  Apparently the only lesson Hutton learned was that federal felony charges are bad publicity.  Other than that, Mrs. Lincoln, how did you like the play?
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par \sect }\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain \qc \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\f1\cgrid0 CHAPTER  IV.  A crock of malarkey
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 1\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Meanwhile, back at the ranch, the plot was thickening: Hutton Trust was getting into trouble of its own.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 2\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The day I reported to work at Hutton Trust I was assigned to handle the transfer of assets for the Vi
etnamese Orphans' Trust:  In April 1975 a number of children were being flown out of Vietnam to be adopted in North America and Europe when a hatch blew off the C-5A, so it crashed near Saigon, injuring many of the children permanently.  In settlement of 
the litigation on behalf of the 45 survivors who were adopted in the U.S., Lockheed Aircraft Corporation had paid $13.5 million into a trust to provide compensation and the costs of medical treatment to the children for the rest of their lives.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 3\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The 
case had been in federal court in D.C., and a lawyer in the D.C. law firm McDermott, Will & Emery was appointed "co-trustee" to oversee the trust.  The complicated trust document called for regular meetings of and reports to the children's parents, and th
e structure was rather like that of a corporation, with the co-trustee as the board of directors and the beneficiaries as stockholders.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 4\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The lawyer who acted as co-trustee was Charles R. Work, and the trustee had been American Security Bank in D.C., 
the one that advertised it was on the back of a currency bill.  When I was doing my thesis on taxation of trusts and estates for my 1983 Master of Laws in Taxation at Georgetown University Law Center, my thesis advisor had been a senior trust officer from
 American Security, and he taught me just about everything I knew about the practicalities of banks' administering trusts before I came to Hutton.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 5\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 An AE from Hutton's C18 brokerage office in D.C., Tom Clark, had persuaded Work to move the trust, whi
ch was down to about $2 million because most of the principal had already been paid to the beneficiaries, from American Security to Hutton Trust.  Later on I found in the file the misrepresentations Hutton Trust made to the federal judge to get his approv
al, saying we were qualified to do business in D.C. when we were not qualified to do business anywhere but in Delaware, but all I knew the first day was that Butler told me to make arrangements to receive and invest the assets.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 6\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 We were going to put 
the assets in three accounts and invest each separately to provide diversity of the investment portfolio and because part of the principal was earmarked for the trust's day-to-day operating expenses, but part was for long-term investment to cover pay-outs
 
in the distant future, which would diminish continuously.  American Security transferred stock to us, and we sold it and invested the proceeds in other securities; it was when that stock started coming in that I found out our SEI system was not programmed
 to accept data on market and book values of assets.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 7\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
It was also when I had my first of many run-ins with Clark, because after I told Hutton's trading desk to invest the proceeds in the non-Hutton securities Butler had chosen to avoid a conflict of 
interests, Clark told me he had decided to invest in other, Hutton funds that paid him a commission.  Abbes ordered me to bust our trades and honor Clark's orders, and I did; Butler was unhappy about it, but he was a lame duck.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 8\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Clark was one of the
 most obnoxious people I've ever met, and that was his reputation throughout Hutton.  One AE who was, like Clark, such a big-volume salesman he was invited to the prestigious annual national meetings/blow-outs Hutton threw for its "Blue Chip" AEs, told me
 
he had met Clark when he roomed with him at one of those conventions:  The AE who was assigned to be Clark's roomie didn't want to be in with him, and this guy, who didn't know Clark but figured he could get along with anybody for a few days, agreed to sw
ap room assignments.  He told me that he hadn't believed anybody could be as obnoxious as Clark, and he was disappointed in himself to find out much and how soon Clark got on his nerves.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 9\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 What's surprising is that anybody like him could make a living
 as a salesman, but that he managed to make such a good living selling proves a person can overcome really huge handicaps.  At one meeting in Abbes's office in January 1985, which may have been the first time I met Clark in person, we were sitting at a sm
a
ll, round table discussing the trust, when Clark suddenly looked at me and asked, apropos of absolutely nothing, "Are you married?"  I never found out why he asked, but I knew it was extremely inappropriate, and Abbes nearly threw himself on the table bet
ween us because he thought my temper was about to blow -\~- it's easy to tell when I'm seriously pissed off, because my ears turn red, my jaw muscles tense up, and my voice comes out sort of clipped and grating.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 10\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Hutton Trust was mishandling all the 
trusts, but the Vietnamese Orphans' Trust became the major bone of contention with the authorities because it had a better paper trail:  The parents' committee and the federal court were both actively overseeing its operations, and its documentation was q
u
ite explicit about how it was supposed to be handled.  I had gone several rounds with Clark and Work in January 1985, and because of those problems and the ones I described in the prior chapter, I was talking to some of Hutton's internal lawyers and AEs a
b
out setting up formal procedures for bringing in and managing trusts, but Abbes forbade me to promulgate any formal rules:  He said that if we had written rules, we'd have to abide by them, and that he would not allow me to make rules that would interfere
 with the AEs' ability to keep treating the trust accounts the way they'd been doing.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 11\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In one of our discussions in his office, Abbes asked me what I thought was going to happen if we didn't set up some formal procedures, and I said the worst-case s
cenario was that the state bank commissioner would cancel our license to do trust business.  He said I was supposed to keep it from coming to that, but if it did, we'd tie the commissioner up in litigation for at least three years, probably longer, and du
r
ing that time we'd still be making money hand over fist, and when we got thrown out of Delaware we'd move to another state and keep going.  That was the first time I was really scared at what I'd gotten myself into, and that's when I vowed not to do anyth
ing I could be legally liable for when it came time to throw some underlings to the wolves to protect Hutton.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 12\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In May 1985 the bank commissioner issued his annual audit report on Hutton Trust.  Besides describing general problems with documentation 
and listing several specific trusts where there were problems, the cover letter and the text of the report were mostly about the Vietnamese Orphans' Trust.  In the report, which was a confidential document not available to anyone except Hutton Trust's man
agement, the commissioner said:
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 13\tab}}\pard \ql \fi-900\li900\ri0\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin900\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
"Mr. Work is apparently delegating and carrying out his duties as co-trustee in direct violation of the above captioned agreement . . . . File correspondence indicates investment policy decisions are being developed 
and directed primarily by two non-appointed persons, Mr. Thomas Clark, a sales broker for E.\~
F. Hutton Company and the subject trust accounts' transactions, and Mr. Robert Warden, an associate attorney for Mr. Work's law firm.  An apparent case of self-dea
ling and improper delegation of duties is evident when Mr. Work allows Mr. Clark to direct investment policy for the trust as well as take commissions form the sale of trust investments."
\par }\pard \ql \li540\ri0\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlcont\ilvl0\ls0\pnrnot0\pndec }\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin540\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 14\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Keep in mind the timing -\~- this report came two weeks aft
er the guilty plea to the check-kiting.  By now the white-out and retyping of the monthly reports was taking more than a month, so we had trusts that hadn't received a statement from us since at least February.  The bank where Hutton Trust had its three c
hecking accounts refused to let us draw any more pension checks on funds that hadn't been deposited yet, so we moved our accounts to a different Wilmington bank.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 15\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 And then Clark popped up with the possibility of getting the co-trustee of the trust for the Vietnamese orphans who had been adopted outside the U.\~
S. to move it to Hutton Trust, too!  We were trying to get straight with the commissioner about the mishandl
ing of the one we already had, and he was bringing in another, bigger one he was planning to play just as fast and loose with and so create more problems.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 16\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Then the federal judge in D.C. ordered Hutton to show cause why it shouldn't be removed as t
rustee in light of the check-kiting.  Despite my strenuous objections to Abbes and Hutton's inside lawyers in New York, Hutton represented to the judge that no one at Hutton Trust was involved in the check-kiting, and the two companies were entirely separ
a
te.  That was enough for the judge, but it didn't happen to be true:  The one person who was removed from most of his corporate offices at Hutton Group and Hutton & Co. for his involvement in the check-kiting was Thomas Lynch, who was chairman of Hutton T
r
ust's board of directors.  There was also the fact that Commissioner Malarkey had reported that an employee of Hutton & Co. was improperly running the Orphans' Trust.  During that summer of 1985, I lay awake a lot of nights looking for a way to keep Hutto
n Trust out of legal trouble and keep myself from being dragged down, too.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 17\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I'd applied for admission to the Delaware bar and taken the bar exam the end of July, and Rod Ward was my preceptor, so I was frequently discussing with him and with Dave Ga
rrett both Hutton's situation and my own, especially the ethical aspects.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 18\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 By the end of September, Hutton Trust was operating with a siege mentality:  Hutton Group was interviewing people to replace Abbes and Hitchcock as CEO and president, and se
veral of us vp's, especially Ron Hatton and I, were maneuvering to move up in the shuffle.  On 8 October I took a business trip to the Alexandria VA brokerage office, and while I was gone there was a flap about a friend of Hatton's applying for the job of
 CEO -\~
- Abbes had found out Hatton had told his friend, an officer at a bank in, I think, Pennsylvania, about the opening, and Hutton in New York had interviewed him.  It was really funny, but the BOM in Alexandria had filled me in on what was happening at
 Hutton in New York and why, and that wasn't funny:  He and many other BOMs around the country had demanded that Fomon replace Abbes and Hitchcock because Hutton Trust wasn't delivering its statements, and the pension trust customers, who were already ner
vous because of the check-kiting, were starting to bail out of Hutton in droves.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 19\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Abbes and Hitchcock were upset and taking it out on us, and for the first time it wasn't much fun to work at Hutton Trust.  As a lawyer I had a particular problem:  Th
e ethics rules prohibited my lying to a court, I was Hutton Trust's lawyer, and I knew it had lied to Judge Oberdorfer about Hutton & Co.'s involvement in managing the Orphans' Trust.  I decided the ethics rules required me to tell Judge Oberdorfer the tr
uth, but they didn't require me to lose my job if I could help it.  (I'd been looking for another job for months, but I never got any offer.)
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 20\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 First I telephoned the judge's chambers and talked to his clerk; I said I had a copy of a document that bo
re on how the trust was being managed, and I wanted to send it to the judge, but I needed to know he wouldn't say who gave it to him.  The clerk, who was probably right out of law school because he had the arrogance and inflated sense of self-importance y
o
u often find in new clerks but seldom in the judges themselves, told me anything they received would be made public, and so would the circumstances under which they received it.  So much for the direct approach, but in a way that simplified matters for me
, because it meant I didn't have to worry about keeping the commissioner's report confidential, because as soon as the judge got it, he was going to make it public anyhow.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 21\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 After several more days of thought, I decided the only kind of person I could trust to carry the report to the judge and not say who gave it to him was a journalist, so I called the }{
\f1\ul\cgrid0 Washington Post}{\f1\cgrid0  and talked to a reporter there.  After several conversations, in which I did not give my name or any information he coul
d trace me by, some days later I agreed to send him a copy of the report, and he promised to take it directly to Oberdorfer; I believed he would, because any good reporter would naturally take it to the judge first and see what happened -\~
- that would make for a better story.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 22\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 So I mailed, anonymously, a copy of the bank examiners' report to the reporter and waited to see what would happen, and two things did:  First, Hutton bought off the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 
Washington Post}{\f1\cgrid0 !  After the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Post}{\f1\cgrid0  took the report to the judg
e and got him worked up, a reporter called Hutton for comment before publishing the story; for about two days Hutton Group's highest officials spent a lot of time on the phone with the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Post}{\f1\cgrid0 's owner, and then the }{
\f1\ul\cgrid0 Post}{\f1\cgrid0  killed the story.  That scared the hell out of me, because I hadn't thought anyone had that much clout, but when the VP's brother-in-law is one of your senior officers, I guess everyone in D.C. listens when you talk.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 23\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The second thing that happened was that on 31 October Oberdorfer issu
ed a notice scheduling a conference for the next week to discuss, among other things, why he hadn't heard about the bank commissioner's report until the reporter showed it to him.  The upshot was not only that Hutton lost the European orphans' trust that 
was coming in, but Work and Hutton were removed as co-trustee and trustee of the one we already had; it was consolidated with the European one all right, but in the hands of the trustees that already had that one.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 24\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Abbes always believed I was the one who leaked the commissioner's report to the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Post}{\f1\cgrid0 
, but he couldn't prove it, and I never admitted it to him.  Not that I was ashamed of what I'd done -\~- quite the contrary, as I'd done what the ethics rules required me to do and the corporate bylaws authorized me, as a vp, to do -\~- but once the }{
\f1\ul\cgrid0 Post}{\f1\cgrid0  knuckled under to Hutton, I knew the undercurrents were too strong for me to keep rocking that particular boat.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 25\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 By December Hutton Group had decided to send someone down to Hutton Trust to whip thing
s into shape, and they chose Ken Simon; he had us hire every accountant and accounting clerk the temp agencies in Wilmington could provide, and then we got some from Philly, too, and we started digging out from under the mountain of overdue statements.

\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 26\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
At Hutton Trust's board of directors meeting on 4 December, I got a nasty surprise:  As corporate secretary, I was there taking the minutes, and because of how much trouble we were in, Fomon attended the meeting.  At one point he asked how our effort
s with "the Congressman" were coming, and Ellis answered that we had Carper "under control," that Phipps was telling him what laws we wanted passed, and it was okay to release the campaign contribution Carper was supposed to get for his help.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 27\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 During the 1990 campaign, Carper's opponents showed me his campaign-contribution reports from that period, and they reflected two equal contributions from Hutton; I don't remember now -
\~- the amount I think I recall them being was $20,000, but that may have be
en the total.  They told me that when they asked Carper about them, he said the second one was a clerical error, that Hutton had made only one contribution, and he'd later given it back, but when he paid it back it got added to the report instead of subtr
a
cted.  That, of course, raises the questions of why he gave it back and why he can't tell the difference between adding and subtracting that much money in his checking account records, but with what we know about House banking now and his three bad checks
, it's remotely possible.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 28\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
But Carper sent me a letter dated 17 February 1987 in which he referred to Phipps as his "friend and supporter," and I know Ellis identified Phipps to Fomon as the bagman who was controlling Carper for Hutton, so I'm left 
wondering whether Carper is a fool, who didn't know he was being controlled by Phipps, or a liar, who didn't know I knew it.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 29\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Remembering the definition of "honest politician" as one who, once he's bought, stays bought, Carper seems to be an honest
 politician, and the facts that he's a Democrat and Hutton is a Republican bastion merely reflect the reality that in Delaware party labels don't count for anything, and the Establishment is the only party that does count.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 30\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 By February 1986 I was i
n the position Tom Lehrer described as that of a Christian Scientist with appendicitis:  I couldn't afford to quit Hutton Trust until I found another job, and I couldn't get another job because I'd been working for Hutton Trust; if I stayed I might end up
 in trouble when the authorities found out what Hutton Trust had been doing, and if I left they would certainly blame the illegalities on me when they got caught -\~
- I was, after all, the one who'd been sending memos describing them to our directors and lawyers, so I was the only one on record as knowing what was happening.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 31\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 By January Abbes was trying to get me to quit, and he started removing my titles and duties, and under the corporate bylaws he didn't have the authority to do that without a vote
 of the board of directors.  In February I gave Hutton's inside lawyers an ultimatum offering them their choice of three alternatives:  One, Hutton could straighten out Hutton Trust and let us start handling the trusts the way we were supposed to, so no o
n
e would get into trouble with the authorities.  Two, Hutton could pay me $500,000 and give me a release, saying I wasn't responsible for what had been going on there, and I'd resign and stop talking to the press and anybody else except under subpoena; I t
hought that was enough to support me until I lived down having worked at Hutton Trust and found another job.  Three, I'd sue Hutton and get the court to rule I wasn't responsible for the illegalities at Hutton Trust.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 32\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Then at the beginning of March 
the bank examiners showed up for their annual audit.  On Wednesday, 5 March, John Smith, who was the examiner heading the audit and one I knew from earlier audits, told me they'd want to talk to me the next day; about 2:30 the next afternoon, he phoned me
 
to come to our glass-walled conference room, and I went.  I'd hardly sat down and given my name and job title when Hitchcock, who was skittering up and down the hall watching what was going on in the conference room, stuck his head in the door and asked m
e to step out in the hall; he told me I was not allowed to talk to the examiners without him, and he was too busy to be present that day -\~
- yeah, too busy not letting anyone talk to the examiners.  I asked if I should tell them, and he said he would, so I went down the hall to my office.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 33\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
A few minutes later Smith walked into my office, handed me a slip of paper with a Dover phone number, and told me to call the bank commissioner's office and make an appointment, because they had to talk to me, espe
cially in light of what had just happened.  As luck would have it, I was scheduled to be in Dover the next day to be sworn into the bar, so I called and made an appointment for the afternoon of Friday, 7 March.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 34\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 By then it was after 3:00 o'clock.  
The examiners packed up and left about 4:00 o'clock, and a few minutes later Hitchcock phoned and asked me to come to Abbes's office; I knew Abbes was going to fire me, and he did, telling me to pack up and be out by the close of business that day.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 35\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 When Butler had left Hutton Trust -\~- by which I mean the day he actually left, although he'd been given notice a month or more before -\~
- he'd had a falling out with Lockwood, and Lockwood had made a scene, shouting in the hall and ordering Butler off t
he premises immediately; it had upset everyone, and then we'd held up Butler's last paycheck, and he'd gone to the state labor board and to a lawyer, and it'd been a mess, both legally and from the employee relations standpoint.  I'd always teased Abbes t
hat when it came time to fire me, I expected him to handle it better than that, and he did.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 36\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 With the help of my secretary and tax clerk, I packed up my stuff, then I went home and telephoned the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Wall Street Journal}{\f1\cgrid0  to tell them what had happened.  
They ran several stories about it over the next weeks, and the local newspaper picked it up, as did the national wire services.  Judge Oberdorfer had put Commissioner Malarkey's 1985 audit report in the court record, so it was a public record then, and I 
gave copies to the reporters who asked for it; they wouldn't have printed my allegations about the mishandling of trusts at Hutton if they hadn't seen the evidence, and that report was the most comprehensive part of the evidence.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 37\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 On 18 April the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Wall Street Journal}{\f1\cgrid0 
 reported that Abbes and Hitchcock had resigned, but for personal reasons and not because of my accusations, and that Malarkey said he hadn't found "any evidence that the unit mishandled trust assets or violated fiduciary obligations."  Th
at was remarkable enough, given that his own report from the year before had listed specific instances of mishandling and fiduciary breaches, but a few weeks later, in "the late spring or early summer of '86," he delivered to Hutton Trust the report of th
e
 1986 audit, the one he'd been conducting when I was fired, and it reported that the same problems cited the year before still existed!  But the two audit reports were confidential, so Malarkey could stand up at his press conference and say in public ther
e was no truth to my charges, when his own reports, delivered before and after the press conference, proved what I was saying.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 38\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
I'd been taught in law school that a civil lawyer's main function is to avoid litigation, to get cases to settle without going to trial.  So I wrote some letters to Hutton asking them to settle my legal claims against them without making me file suit.  In
 a letter dated 22 September 1986, Hutton's new legal vp Stephen J. Friedman called my "demands" extortion and said they were looking into having me disbarred in every jurisdiction where I was admitted to practice law.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 39\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I tried for months to hire a 
lawyer to represent me, but no one would, and then one of my mentors told me the word was out, and I wouldn't be able to find any lawyer who would sue Hutton for me.  So on 31 August 1987 I filed a civil RICO suit against Hutton Group, Hutton & Co., and H
utton Trust in federal court in Wilmington, and I filed it }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 pro}{\f1\cgrid0  }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 se}{\f1\cgrid0 , which means for myself, without any attorney representing me.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 40\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls5\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 4:\'b6}}\faauto\ls5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I hadn't known much about RICO before 1987, but I'd done enough research to know that was the legal theory I wanted to 
use:  Because I lived in Delaware and all three Hutton entities were Delaware corporations, there wasn't diversity of citizenship, so I couldn't go to federal court unless I raised a federal question, and the RICO statute was federal, so it provided juris
diction.  Also, that statute required the court to award me three times whatever damages I proved I had suffered, plus court costs and attorney's fees.
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par \sect }\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain \qc \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\f1\cgrid0 CHAPTER  V.  Tilting at windmills for fun and profit
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 1\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 At the same time the events I'
ve described were happening to me at Hutton Trust, someone else was having a similar experience at another company incorporated in Delaware.  Like me he was a senior executive at a subsidiary of a national conglomerate and a shareholder in the conglomerat
e
, but unlike me he was the CEO of the sub because he'd started the smaller company and sold it to the conglomerate, and his block of the parent's stock was significant.  Like me he was dissatisfied with the asinine and illegal way the conglomerate was ope
rating and how it was forcing him to operate the sub, and he'd been telling the national press about it.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 2\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 By the summer of 1986 he'd given the conglomerate an ultimatum with three alternatives:  Either let him run the sub the way it should be run or 
buy him out so he could leave, or else he'd sue them.  After that his story is vastly different from mine, but then he was H. Ross Perot, the conglomerate was GM, and his sub was EDS.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 3\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 GM did buy Perot's GM stock back, and he resigned from EDS and p
romised to quit criticizing GM, but GM paid him so many millions of dollars that its shareholders sued GM and Perot, calling the payment "hushmail."  The Chancery Court has ruled twice in the matter, and the Delaware Supreme Court once, and they're agreed
 
that GM's board acted properly in paying Perot to get out because his grousing was interfering with the way the board was trying to run GM.  If it wasn't extortion for him to give GM his ultimatum, and the courts have ruled it wasn't, then it couldn't hav
e been extortion for me to give Hutton the same ultimatum.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 4\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Another situation was shaping up in 1986 that also led to a civil RICO suit for violation of the federal securities laws and for extortion:  In 1986 Carl C. Icahn started buying more stock i
n Viacom International, Inc., and threatened to take the company over; in May Viacom bought back its stock from him, for $79.50 per share when it was trading at $62, and he promised not to buy any more Viacom stock for eleven years.  Then Viacom sued him 
for extorting this "greenmail" from it, the federal court in New York dismissed the suit, and the appeals court affirmed, saying Viacom hadn't been damaged because what it got from Icahn was worth what it paid.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 5\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In its published opinion the district 
court discussed the difference between "extortion" and "hard bargaining" and concluded that it's not extortion if the person demanding the payment has a right to assert the legal claim he's offering to release in exchange for the payment -\~
- Icahn had the 
right to try to take Viacom over, and he could release that right in exchange for Viacom's payment.  I had a right to sue Hutton for firing me and for ruining my reputation by involving me in its criminal activities, and I could release that claim the sam
e way anyone hurt in a car accident can settle his claim against the driver or his insurance carrier.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 6\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Of course those cases were decided within the past year or two, so when I filed my case in 1987, there were no precedents with such similar facts. 
 I'd like to take credit for behaving so much like the big boys in 1986, but the truth is I wasn't clever enough or experienced enough to have dealt with Hutton the way I did without the expert advice I was receiving, especially that from Dave Garrett, an
 
expert in trust banking, and Rod Ward, an expert in corporation law.  Because Hutton had been their client before I met them, however, and their relationship with me grew out of that relationship with Hutton, they could not represent either one of us in o
ur litigation.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 7\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
One reason I say Ward is so smart it's scary is that one day in autumn 1985 I was in his office telling him what was happening at Hutton Trust, and he said, "You know if you have to sue them, I won't be able to represent you."  At tha
t point I was so busy fighting alligators I'd forgotten about draining the swamp, and that possibility had never even crossed my mind, but I suddenly saw that I might, indeed, end up suing Hutton, and all the big lawyers would be on their side.  But the s
ilver lining to that dark cloud also appeared to me, so I answered, "Yes, but you won't be able to represent them, either."  And that's the way it played out a couple of years later.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 8\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 In early 1987, while I was still looking for a lawyer to sue Hutto
n for me, I got another one of those nasty shocks that made me nervous about going up against Hutton:  The tv news shows were talking about Iranscam, and I noticed on the ABC news one night (I don't pay much attention to news, but }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 
Jeopardy!}{\f1\cgrid0  comes on that c
hannel at the end of the national news) that the IBC statements they were showing were monthly statements from a Hutton & Co. account.  Like a light bulb going on over my head in a cartoon, a lot of things I'd seen and heard in dealing with IDP in late 19
84 clicked into place, and I realized I'd been mixed up in Iranscam.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 9\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I was really worried then that when I sued Hutton they would accuse me of some criminal violation for having dealt with IDP, and if I got into a pissing contest with Hutton, I was 
going to be at a distinct disadvantage, so I decided I had to act first.  I wrote to the }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Wall Street Journal}{\f1\cgrid0 
 reporter who'd reported my firing, telling him what I knew about IDP and asking if he thought it was part of Iranscam or was I just being paranoid;
 I got a phone call a few days later saying his sources indicated I was onto the real thing.  Then I wrote to the Senate Select Committee on Secret Military Assistance for Iran and the Nicaraguan Opposition telling everything I knew about IDP and what I'd
 
done with them; a few days later I got a phone call from one of that committee's staff attorneys checking to see if I had any more information but saying because of the nature of their investigation they wouldn't be able to tell me what came of the leads 
I gave them.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 10\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
At about the same time, I'd tried to file a criminal RICO complaint with the federal prosecutor in Wilmington, because one of the lawyers I'd consulted about representing me was a former federal prosecutor and said the documents I had 
were sufficient to support an indictment against both Hutton and Malarkey, and I should let the government handle the litigation, because it would be all over the country and take a lot of money.  But all U.\~
S. Attorney Bill Carpenter did was send an FBI s
pecial agent to talk to me, and he kept nodding off to sleep while I was trying to talk to him about the banking violations at Hutton Trust; when I mentioned Iranscam, however, he perked up, and some days later he came back with his supervisor and asked s
ome more questions about it.  That's how I know I didn't just imagine that IDP was part of Iranscam.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 11\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 When Skadden Arps couldn't represent Hutton against me because of its conflict of interest, Hutton hired Morris, Nichols, Arsht & Tunnell; the grow
n-up lawyer on the case was Thomas Reed Hunt Jr., and the associate who did the scut work was Brett D. Fallon.  I'd had vanishingly little practical experience of civil litigation, and I learned a great deal from seeing them work; I wouldn't realize it un
til later when I saw how bad some of the other lawyers in town are, but in their dealings with me they exemplified the highest standards the bar sets for itself.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 12\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Which is not to say they didn't put up a good fight, but they fought clean and fair, a
nd it never got personal.  Even when Hunt told me they were not only going to have the case dismissed but also have the court order me to pay their costs and attorneys' fees, he was a perfect gentleman, and I admired his style.  I answered that the most t
hey could do was drive me into bankruptcy, and then I'd load my dogs and my clothes in the car, leave the bank to foreclose on the house, and move in with my parents in Mississippi -\~
- since the kids have moved out, they have three bedrooms and two baths with no one to use them, and there's a motel-sized pool in the back yard, so it wouldn't be too hard a life.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 13\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 We futzed around with the litigation for nearly two years, and in March 1989 Judge Joseph J. Longobardi dismissed my complaint for lack of s
tanding, saying I wasn't directly injured by the RICO conspiracy I alleged, and that calls for a little discussion of the RICO statute.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 14\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Congress made the "Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations" chapter part of the federal criminal code, e
ffective 15 October 1970, to be able to prosecute organized crime for using legitimate businesses as fronts or money laundries for the proceeds of criminal activity.  It defines "pattern of racketeering activity" to be at least two felony violations of ce
r
tain state or federal statutes committed by the same person within 10 years, and at least one act has to have been after this law went into effect.  The statute makes it a crime to use money from such racketeering activity to start, buy, or run a business
 engaged in interstate commerce or to conspire with somebody else to do so.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 15\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Besides being a criminal law, the statute also provides that anybody "injured in his business or property" by a violation of the RICO statute can sue in federal court and "
shall recover threefold the damages he sustains and the cost of the suit, including a reasonable attorney's fee."  The so-called "predicate acts" that form the pattern of racketeering activity include mail and wire fraud ("wire" usually means "telephone")
, embezzling from union funds (which some of the pension funds were), and securities fraud.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 16\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I said in my complaint that Hutton Group had set up Hutton Trust to allow Hutton Group to collect trustees' fees from the same accounts it was collecting br
okerage commissions from, through Hutton & Co., but that Hutton Group never made or let Hutton Trust perform the trustees' duties to earn the fees, and that violated the RICO statute.  I said that they hired me and the other employees by making us think H
u
tton Trust was a legitimate company when it wasn't, and that was fraud on us in furtherance of their RICO conspiracy against the trust clients, and firing me to keep me from answering the bank examiners' questions injured me, and therefore I'd been injure
d in my business or property by their RICO violation, and I was entitled to recover.  Judge Longobardi didn't agree.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 17\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I appealed the dismissal to the federal appeals court, which sits in Philadelphia, and served the notice of appeal on Hunt, but the
n Hutton switched lawyers.  That was probably a practical rather than a tactical decision -\~
- Hutton had been bought by Shearson Lehman in 1988, and in fact I'd filed a suit in Chancery Court complaining, among other things, that Shearson didn't pay us sha
reholders enough for our Hutton stock in their merger because of Hutton's legal liabilities, which Shearson bought along with Hutton's assets -\~
- because Richards, Layton & Finger, the firm that replaced Morris Nichols, had been working for Shearson for some time.  Replacing Morris Nichols was a strategic error on Hutton's part, though.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 18\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Although we were litigating a federal claim in federal court, they assigned the case to Anne C. Foster, a lawyer with virtually no experience in federal court who w
asn't even admitted to practice in the federal courts yet -\~
- most of her experience was in Chancery Court, in cases alleging breach of the corporate directors' fiduciary duties to the shareholders, where all the corporation has to prove is it had a busine
ss reason for doing what it did, and it wins.  She has never seemed to grasp the idea that in a RICO suit it doesn't matter why you did it:  If you did it, you're guilty.  But it probably didn't matter what she thought, because Hutton was always an extrem
ely sexist organization (and Shearson seems to be upholding that tradition), and they would never pay much attention to anything a woman said anyhow -\~
- that was always my problem with Hutton:  I couldn't get their attention because they've never to this day taken me seriously.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 19\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
There are no trials in appellate court:  Both sides submit written briefs, and the court may hold oral argument, but the hearing is just for argument, no testimony or evidence.  In this case the court didn't ask for oral argu
ment; we sent in our briefs, and in September 1989 the court issued a published opinion reversing the dismissal and saying I did so have standing to sue Hutton under RICO.  Given the appellate court's opinion on the law, all I had to do was prove the fact
s I'd alleged in my complaint, and I had to win.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 20\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Any reasonable defendant would have settled the case right then, but not Hutton.  Two years later, in September 1991, we finally went to trial; not only had Hutton kept sniping at me and squabbling a
bout stuff that didn't matter, but Longobardi had been so cranky to me as to border on hostility.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 21\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Take the famous forged U-4, for example:  In the fall of 1985, when I was trying to find another job either inside Hutton or outside it, managers of 
several Hutton & Co. units were talking to me about coming to work for them, but to share in commissions I'd have to have a "Series 7" license.  By then my relationship with Abbes was rather brittle -\~
- because he'd asked me to quit, and I'd not only refused but also told several Hutton & Co. "heavy hitter" AEs who owed me favors, and they'd told Abbes they didn't want me fired because I was helping them so much -\~
- so I sent a memo to Lynch asking him if I could be licensed, and he said I could and forwarded it to the Hutton & Co. department that handled licensing.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 22\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 They not only registered me for the exam but also sent me the materials to study for it, as we
ll as the Form U-4 that is the application to be a "registered representative," which is what an AE is and what you have to be to get paid a brokerage commission.  You also have to be employed by a member of the Stock Exchange, which Hutton & Co. was, but
 
Hutton Group wasn't, and of course Hutton Trust wasn't.  The form had a part the applicant was supposed to fill in, with name, address, employer's name and address, and recent employment history in it, and then there was a part the employer was supposed t
o fill in and sign; above where the applicant was supposed to sign it recited, among other things, that the applicant agreed to binding arbitration, under the NYSE rules, of any dispute between the applicant and the employer.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 23\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The instructions said 
fill it in in black ink and print, and we couldn't find a black pen anywhere at Hutton Trust, so Abbes told me to fill it in in blue ink and then make a photocopy and sign that as the original; he also told me to fill in the part he was supposed to do, an
d when I said the employer was supposed to do that part, he said he was doing it, by having his employee (me) do it, and he was right, so I did.  I made the photocopy, and he and I signed it, then I sent it to Hutton in New York.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 24\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 After I filed suit
, Hutton moved to dismiss on the grounds that I'd agreed to binding arbitration, and they submitted a copy of the U-4 they'd sent to the securities authorities when they registered me.  But, lo and behold, where I had accurately printed Hutton Trust's nam
e
 and address in the block for my employer, someone at Hutton in New York had whited that out and written in Hutton & Co.'s name and address.  I still had the original blue-ink version, so I figured I had Hutton by the short hairs:  They'd just produced ev
idence they lied to the securities authorities by mail and telephone, and that was mail and wire fraud, actionable under RICO.  But Longobardi keeps saying that I was equally at fault in falsifying the U-4 because I filled in the employer's section!

\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 25\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
There's also the matter of unemployment benefits:  Hutton Trust's bylaws defined me as a senior corporate officer and provided that a senior officer could be fired, with or without cause, only by a three-fifths vote of the board of directors.  (Abbes kep
t asking me to resign because he didn't want to have the directors vote on it; that's how he'd gotten rid of Butler, and then Abbes changed the old board minutes to make it look like Butler hadn't held the offices it required a board vote to terminate.)  
W
hen I was fired, I filed for unemployment benefits, and Hutton didn't answer the claim; I submitted the newspaper clippings where Hutton said I was fired for making improper demands, and the unemployment office made written findings that didn't amount to 
cause under Delaware law, so I collected unemployment for much of 1986.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 26\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 After I filed suit, Hutton also moved to dismiss on the grounds that I'd been fired for cause, and it submitted minutes of a board meeting ratifying my termination for cause bu
t not saying that the vote was more than a simple majority.  Given the bylaws requiring a supermajority vote and the ruling of the unemployment office, which Hutton didn't appeal when it had the chance, Hutton's position had to be rejected as a matter of 
l
aw, but Longobardi has always treated it as an open question whether I was fired for cause, as Hutton says, or to keep me from talking to the bank examiners, as I say.  I could give you more examples of how Longobardi, who's now chief judge for the distri
ct, has sided with Hutton to give me a hard time, but you get the idea.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 27\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 The trial took most of two days: 30 September and 1 October 1991.  I testified the first day, and my cross examination continued into the second day, then Hutton put on four wi
tnesses: one of Hutton's inside lawyers who was still working for Shearson, Abbes, Hitchcock, and Shapiro.  Not only did they not contradict my allegations, they actually testified that they were true in every material aspect!
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 28\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 There were many comi
cal moments:  Hitchcock, trying as usual to wimp out from under any responsibility, testified to not having known then or not remembering now most of what I asked him, and Abbes testified to not knowing who had issued his pay checks.  While I'd been testi
f
ying, I'd several times tried to introduce a subject, like Lockwood's tantrum when he fired Butler, and Foster had objected, and Longobardi had ruled it out; then her witnesses got on the stand and testified to it for me.  The way Longobardi fawned all ov
er Shapiro would have been funny if it weren't so pathetic:  The only thing more disgusting than having to watch a federal judge suck up to anybody that much is having the guy he's sucking up to be your opponent's star witness.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 29\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I was suspicious of 
my good fortune when the first three witnesses not only didn't counter my evidence but actually supported my case, but then Shapiro took the stand and did so much to help me that I considered whether I was dreaming, and the alarm clock would go off any mi
nute for me to get up and go to the real trial.  Malarkey was dead by then, and I'd figured there was no way}{\i\f1\cgrid0  }{\f1\cgrid0 to prove who was responsible for his lying to the press -\~
- saying there was no truth to my charges when his own reports documented everything I was saying -\~
- so I hadn't even included any defamation claims in my complaint, but the appellate court had ruled that "loss of earnings, benefits, and reputation constitute self-evident injury as in any standard wrongful discharge action."  My reputation had
 certainly been injured by his making me out to be a liar, but I doubted I'd be able to blame Hutton for it -\~- I'd expected Hutton to be smart enough to say Malarkey must have done that on his own, so Hutton wasn't liable to me for it.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 30\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 But Shapiro testified -\~- voluntarily, on direct examination, in answer to Foster's questions, and before I even started to cross examine him -\~
- that he was the one who suggested that Malarkey tell the reporters that!  That admission meant Hutton was liab
le for the deliberate injury to my reputation, because one of the federal civil procedure rules says that if you prove something at trial that you didn't put in your complaint, it shall (not "may" but "shall") be treated as if you did include it in your c
omplaint.  That was like Christmas coming early, but then it got even better.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 31\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Shapiro had testified on direct examination that when Malarkey issued his 1986 audit report on Hutton Trust, it showed the same problems that had been described in the 19
85 report, what Shapiro helpfully described as the kind of problems you'd expect from having brokerage people trying to run a bank.  I'd never seen the 1986 report, and I hadn't asked for it during discovery because it was written after I'd been fired, so
 
I knew Longobardi would rule I couldn't have it, and I'd hate like the devil to give either him or my opponents the satisfaction of keeping me from getting something I want.  But I knew the federal evidence rules pretty well, and one of them says if a wit
ness looks at a document to refresh his recollection before testifying, you get to see it.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 32\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 So I asked Shapiro if he'd reviewed any documents in preparation for testifying, and Bingo!  He admitted to reviewing the commissioner's 1986 report, I asked
 for it, and Longobardi said they had to let me see it; Foster objected and kept dithering about it being too late for me to make a request for Hutton to produce documents, but that just showed she didn't understand the rules of evidence.  Moments like th
at made the trial truly memorable.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 33\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
Neither Hutton nor I had asked to have a jury for the trial:  I didn't, because I thought the breaches of fiduciary duty, both the trustee's duties and the directors' duties, were too technical for many jurors to 
care about, and I wasn't sure a jury would see me as a sympathetic plaintiff; you'd have to ask Hutton why they didn't want a jury.  Besides, a jury comes back with a verdict, and you're pretty much stuck with it, but when you have the judge decide the ca
s
e, he has to issue an opinion setting forth his reasons, and if you appeal his ruling, the appellate court goes over his reasoning as well as his result.  And whatever his shortcomings of intellect and temperament, Longobardi used to be a vice chancellor 
and so must have a solid background in both types of fiduciary breach.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 34\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 At the end of the evidence on 1 October, he gave us an expedited schedule for filing our written arguments because, he said, he wanted us all "to deal with this while it's hot a
nd fresh in our minds."  The last brief was submitted on 7 December 1991; as I write this, in June 1992, we're still waiting for him to deliver the verdict.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\b\f1\fs20\cf6\cgrid0 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5:\hich\f1 \'b6\loch\f1 35\tab}}\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls6\pnrnot0\pndec\pnb1\pni0\pncf6\pnf1\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120 
{\pntxtb 5:\'b6}}\faauto\ls6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 I know that he'll have to give us a decision sooner or later, and then one or both of us m
ay appeal it, so this litigation may drag on for several more years, but it will eventually be over, and I'll be able to get on with my life.  In the hope that this year will see the end of this case, which has cluttered up my present and future for more 
t
han six years, I've written the story now, for two reasons:  Personally, when the case finally ends, I don't want to have to think about it anymore; politically, this information should be stirred into the mix upon which we'll base our electoral decisions
 in November.
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\f1\cgrid0 END OF TEXT
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par \sect }\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 INDEX OF TOPICS MENTIONED IN TEXT
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 
\par 
\par ABC news
\par ACLU of Delaware
\par AE = "account executive"
\par AG = "attorney general"
\par Abbes, Jay J.
\par ACLU of Delaware
\par account executive, Hutton & Co.
\par accountants from temp agencies
\par AE = "account executive"
\par AG = "attorney general"
\par Air Force base, Dover DE
\par alligators
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 All Honorable Men}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par Allen, William T.
\par American Bar Association
\par American Pacific Trading Co.
\par American Party, Delaware
\par American Security Bank
\par Anthony, Mary Alice
\par appellate court
\par assets in trust accounts
\par Astrotech International Corp
\par Attorney General of Delaware
\par auditors, bank = "bank examiners"
\par autobahn: Switzerland
\par BNA = "Bureau of National Affairs"
\par BOM = "branch office manager"
\par Babiarz, John E., Jr.
\par Bacon, Perry
\par bank auditors = "bank examiners"
\par bank examiners & reports, Delaware
\par Bankhead, Tallulah
\par Banking Committee, Congressional
\par Basel, Switzerland
\par Bell, Griffin
\par beneficiaries of trusts
\par Berger, Carolyn
\par Biden, Joseph R.
\par BNA = "Bureau of National Affairs"
\par board of directors, Hutton Trust
\par BOM = "branch office manager"
\par branch office manager, Hutton & Co.
\par Brady, M. Jane
\par Broyhill, James T.
\par Buckson, David P.
\par Burchard, Mr. & Mrs. Thomas
\par Bureau of National Affairs
\par Bush, Barbara Pierce
\par Bush, George H. W.
\par Butler, Paul
\par bylaws, Hutton Trust's corporate
\par CIA = "Central Intelligence Agency"
\par CSD = "Consulting Services Division"
\par cable tv, Delaware
\par campaign contributions, Delaware
\par campaign financing laws, Delaware
\par Capitol, Washington DC
\par Carey, Justice
\par Carpenter, William
\par Carper, Thomas R.
\par Castle, Michael
\par Central Intelligence Agency, U.\~S.
\par chancery, history of
\par Chancery Court of Delaware
\par check-kiting, Congressional
\par check-kiting, Hutton's
\par checks & balances
\par Chesapeake & Delaware canal
\par chicken farming & processing
\par Christian Scientist
\par chump change
\par CIA = "Central Intelligence Agency"
\par Clark, Thomas
\par coconuts, used to catch monkeys
\par coded brokerage office numbers
\par collective funds
\par conflict of interest
\par Congress
\par Congressional blind trusts
\par Constitution Party, Delaware
\par Consulting Services Division, Hutton & Co.
\par corporate bylaws, Hutton Trust's"
\par corporate directors = "board of directors"
\par corporate secretary, Hutton Trust
\par corporation law
\par Craig, Daniel
\par Craven, Joseph Donald
\par credit card companies
\par Crusader Trust
\par CSD = "Consulting Services Division"
\par DAG = "deputy attorney general"
\par defamation
\par Delaware: ACLU
\par Delaware: agriculture
\par Delaware: attorney general
\par Delaware: bank commissioner ="Malarkey"
\par Delaware: bank examiners
\par Delaware: bar admission
\par Delaware: Chancery Court
\par Delaware: courts' jurisdiction
\par Delaware: courts' rules
\par Delaware: Dept. of Justice
\par Delaware: government
\par Delaware: governor
\par Delaware: legislature
\par Delaware: media
\par Delaware: number of lawyers
\par Delaware: political parties
\par Delaware: population
\par Delaware: public defender
\par Delaware: women judges
\par Delaware Party
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Delaware State News}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par DeRiemer, David S.
\par directors, corporate = "board of directors"
\par disbarment threat
\par diversity of citizenship
\par Dolder Grand Hotel, Zurich, Switzerland
\par Dover DE
\par Ducote, Richard
\par du\~Pont = E.\~I. du\~Pont de Nemours & Company, Inc.
\par duPont family
\par EDS
\par E.\~F. Hutton & Co. Inc.
\par E.\~F. Hutton entities, relationship
\par E.\~F. Hutton Group Inc.
\par E.\~F. Hutton Life Insurance Company
\par E.\~F. Hutton Trust Company
\par E.\~I. du\~Pont de Nemours & Company, Inc.
\par ERISA
\par Einstein, Albert
\par election, 1912
\par election, 1954
\par election, 1966
\par election, 1974
\par election, 1976
\par election, 1978
\par election, 1982
\par election, 1984
\par election, 1986
\par election, 1988
\par election, 1990
\par election, 1992
\par Ellis, John
\par embezzling union funds
\par equity court = "chancery court"
\par ethics rules
\par examiners, bank
\par extortion
\par FBI = "Federal Bureau of Investigation"
\par Fallon, Brett D.
\par Federal Communications Commission
\par federal criminal code
\par federal jurisdiction
\par Federal Bureau of Investigation
\par Federal Reserve
\par federal rules of civil procedure
\par federal rules of evidence
\par fiduciary's duties
\par Fomon, Robert
\par forged documents
\par Form U-4
\par Foster, Anne C.
\par France
\par fraud, mail & wire, Hutton's
\par French
\par Friedman, Stephen J.
\par GM = "General Motors"
\par Gannett
\par Garrett, David J.
\par Gebelein, Richard S.
\par General Motors
\par Georgetown University Law Center
\par Germany
\par GM = "General Motors"
\par gorilla, 800-pound
\par Grand Opera House, Wilmington DE
\par greenmail
\par gun-running
\par HPM = "Hutton Portfolio Management"
\par Haig, Alexander
\par Halloween 1984
\par hard bargaining
\par Hatton, Ronald
\par Hausman, Conrad K.
\par Hercules Incorporated
\par Heritage cable tv
\par Herrman, Justice
\par Higgins, Henry
\par Hitchcock, William B.
\par honest politician, defined
\par HPM = "Hutton Portfolio Management"
\par Hunt, Thomas Reed, Jr.
\par hushmail
\par Hutton = "E.\~F. Hutton"
\par Hutton Portfolio Management, CSD
\par IBC
\par ICI Americas Inc
\par IDP = "International Development Programs Inc."
\par Icahn, Carl C.
\par ice skating
\par IDP = "International Development Programs Inc."
\par Imari china
\par Internal Revenue Code
\par International Development Programs Inc.
\par Iran
\par Iran-Contra affair -- called "Iranscam" in text
\par Iranscam = "Iran-Contra affair"
\par Jefferson, Thomas
\par Jennison, John
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Jeopardy!}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par Johnson, Lyndon B.
\par Jung, Francis L.
\par jury
\par Justice of the Peace
\par Kaiser, Julian
\par karma
\par Kennedy, John F.
\par Korean Conflict
\par law clerks, arrogance of young
\par Legal Dept., Hutton & Co.
\par Lehrer, Tom
\par Libertarian Party
\par Lincoln, Abraham
\par Lincoln, Mary Todd
\par local counsel
\par Lockheed Aircraft Corporation
\par Lockwood, James C.
\par Longobardi, Joseph J.
\par Lynch, Thomas P.
\par Maalox
\par mail fraud
\par Malarkey, John E.
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Marbury v. Madison}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par Market Street Mall, Wilmington DE
\par Marvel, Rocky
\par Master of Laws in Taxation
\par McDermott, Will & Emery
\par McInerney, Joseph F.
\par media in Delaware
\par merger, Shearson Lehman/Hutton
\par Mills, Wilbur
\par Mississippi
\par monkeys, catching
\par Morris, Nichols, Arsht & Tunnell
\par "My Fair Lady"
\par NYSE = "New York Stock Exchange"
\par National Organization for Women, Del. chapter
\par New York Stock Exchange
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 News Journal}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par newspapers
\par Norsud Corp.
\par NYSE = "New York Stock Exchange"
\par Oberdorfer, Louis F.
\par Oberly, III, Charles M.
\par office i.d. numbers, Hutton
\par Oldfield, Barney
\par Olympics
\par oral argument
\par Owen, Thomas M.
\par passports
\par pension funds
\par Perot, H. Ross
\par Phipps, Greg
\par Pierce, Scott
\par pizza connection
\par politician, honest, defined
\par pooled income funds
\par Poppiti, Vincent J.
\par Potter, Anderson & Corroon
\par Potter, William S.
\par predicate acts, RICO
\par Prickett, Jones, Elliott, Kristol & Schnee
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 pro}{\f1\cgrid0  }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 se,}{\f1\cgrid0  defined
\par Public Defender of Delaware
\par public library, Wilmington DE
\par Purdue, Frank
\par qualified plans = "pension funds"
\par RICO (federal statute)
\par Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organizations Act
\par radio stations
\par Rappa, Daniel D.
\par Reagan, Ronald W.
\par Recorder of Deeds, New Castle County DE
\par refreshing recollection
\par registered representative = "AE"
\par Register of Wills, New Castle County DE
\par Reinhart, Len
\par remaindermen of trusts
\par Richards, Layton & Finger
\par RICO statute
\par riot act
\par rocket scientists
\par Rodney, Caesar
\par Rodney Square, Wilmington DE
\par Roeder, Richard
\par Roth, Jane R.
\par Roth, William V., Jr.
\par SEI
\par Saudi Arabia
\par Scott, B. Gary
\par Scott, Susan J.
\par Second Coming
\par securities fraud
\par securities license
\par self-dealing
\par }\pard \ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 Senate Select Committee on Secret Military Assistance for Iran and the Nicaraguan Opposition
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx900\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f1\cgrid0 senators, federal
\par separation of powers
\par Series 7 license
\par settlement of litigation
\par Shah of Iran
\par Shapiro, Irving S.
\par Shearson Lehman
\par silver lining
\par Silverman, Fred S.
\par Simon, Ken
\par Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom
\par Smith, John
\par standing to sue
\par State Dept., U.\~S.
\par State Street Bank, Boston
\par statements for Hutton accounts
\par stock exchange
\par Stone, F. L. Peter
\par Storer cable tv
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Storer v. Brown}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par Sullivan, Lawrence M.
\par supermajority
\par swamp
\par Swiss bank
\par tax records & returns
\par television stations
\par termination of employment
\par Third World nations
\par Three Stooges
\par treble damages under RICO
\par trial
\par Trinity Church, New York NY
\par trustees' duties
\par trusts, defined
\par U-4 = "Form U-4"
\par U.\~S. Attorney, District of Delaware
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 U.\~S. News & World Report}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par U.\~S. Treasury notes
\par ultimatum
\par unemployment compensation
\par University of Delaware
\par Urbanski, Calla
\par Viacom International, Inc.
\par vice chancellors
\par Vietnam
\par Vietnamese Orphans' Trust
\par voting rights, cases on
\par Walker, Barton F., Jr.
\par Walker & Walker Associates, Inc.
\par Wall Street, New York NY
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Wall Street Journal}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par Ward, E. Doug
\par Ward, Rodman, Jr.
\par Washington DC
\par Washington DC, Hutton brokerage offices in
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Washington Post}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Waters v. State}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par Werb, Duane D.
\par White House, Washington DC
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Who's Who}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par Wier, Richard R., Jr.
\par wife-beating, Carper's
\par }{\f1\ul\cgrid0 Williams v. Rhodes}{\f1\cgrid0 
\par Wilmington Trust Company
\par wire fraud
\par Wolcott, Chief Justice
\par Wolf, Dale E.
\par women judges, in Delaware
\par Woo, S. B.
\par Work, Charles R.
\par World War II
\par wrongful discharge = "wrongful termination"
\par Zurich, Switzerland
\par }}